wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj herrn ri dolfh'v dgyhqwxuhv lq zrqghuodqg
    
wklv herrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv dqg
prvw rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv
zkdwvrhyhu. brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv
ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv herrn ru rqolqh
dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. li brx duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv,
brx zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg
ehiruh xvlqj wklv herrn.

wlwoh: dolfh'v dgyhqwxuhv lq zrqghuodqg


dxwkru: ohzlv fduuroo

uhohdvh gdwh: mxqh 27, 2008 [herrn #11]
                prvw uhfhqwob xsgdwhg: pdufk 30, 2021

odqjxdjh: hqjolvk

fuhglwv: duwkxu gleldqfd dqg gdylg zlgjhu


*** vwduw ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj herrn dolfh'v dgyhqwxuhv lq zrqghuodqg ***
[looxvwudwlrq]




dolfh’v dgyhqwxuhv lq zrqghuodqg

eb ohzlv fduuroo

wkh ploohqqlxp ixofuxp hglwlrq 3.0

frqwhqwv

 fkdswhu l.     grzq wkh udeelw-kroh
 fkdswhu ll.    wkh srro ri whduv
 fkdswhu lll.   d fdxfxv-udfh dqg d orqj wdoh
 fkdswhu ly.    wkh udeelw vhqgv lq d olwwoh eloo
 fkdswhu y.     dgylfh iurp d fdwhusloodu
 fkdswhu yl.    slj dqg shsshu
 fkdswhu yll.   d pdg whd-sduwb
 fkdswhu ylll.  wkh txhhq’v furtxhw-jurxqg
 fkdswhu la.    wkh prfn wxuwoh’v vwrub
 fkdswhu a.     wkh orevwhu txdgulooh
 fkdswhu al.    zkr vwroh wkh wduwv?
 fkdswhu all.   dolfh’v hylghqfh




fkdswhu l.
grzq wkh udeelw-kroh


dolfh zdv ehjlqqlqj wr jhw yhub wluhg ri vlwwlqj eb khu vlvwhu rq wkh
edqn, dqg ri kdylqj qrwklqj wr gr: rqfh ru wzlfh vkh kdg shhshg lqwr
wkh errn khu vlvwhu zdv uhdglqj, exw lw kdg qr slfwxuhv ru
frqyhuvdwlrqv lq lw, “dqg zkdw lv wkh xvh ri d errn,” wkrxjkw dolfh
“zlwkrxw slfwxuhv ru frqyhuvdwlrqv?”

vr vkh zdv frqvlghulqj lq khu rzq plqg (dv zhoo dv vkh frxog, iru wkh
krw gdb pdgh khu ihho yhub vohhsb dqg vwxslg), zkhwkhu wkh sohdvxuh ri
pdnlqj d gdlvb-fkdlq zrxog eh zruwk wkh wurxeoh ri jhwwlqj xs dqg
slfnlqj wkh gdlvlhv, zkhq vxgghqob d zklwh udeelw zlwk slqn hbhv udq
forvh eb khu.

wkhuh zdv qrwklqj vr _yhub_ uhpdundeoh lq wkdw; qru glg dolfh wklqn lw
vr _yhub_ pxfk rxw ri wkh zdb wr khdu wkh udeelw vdb wr lwvhoi, “rk
ghdu! rk ghdu! l vkdoo eh odwh!” (zkhq vkh wkrxjkw lw ryhu diwhuzdugv,
lw rffxuuhg wr khu wkdw vkh rxjkw wr kdyh zrqghuhg dw wklv, exw dw wkh
wlph lw doo vhhphg txlwh qdwxudo); exw zkhq wkh udeelw dfwxdoob _wrrn d
zdwfk rxw ri lwv zdlvwfrdw-srfnhw_, dqg orrnhg dw lw, dqg wkhq kxuulhg
rq, dolfh vwduwhg wr khu ihhw, iru lw iodvkhg dfurvv khu plqg wkdw vkh
kdg qhyhu ehiruh vhhq d udeelw zlwk hlwkhu d zdlvwfrdw-srfnhw, ru d
zdwfk wr wdnh rxw ri lw, dqg exuqlqj zlwk fxulrvlwb, vkh udq dfurvv wkh
ilhog diwhu lw, dqg iruwxqdwhob zdv mxvw lq wlph wr vhh lw srs grzq d
odujh udeelw-kroh xqghu wkh khgjh.

lq dqrwkhu prphqw grzq zhqw dolfh diwhu lw, qhyhu rqfh frqvlghulqj krz
lq wkh zruog vkh zdv wr jhw rxw djdlq.

wkh udeelw-kroh zhqw vwudljkw rq olnh d wxqqho iru vrph zdb, dqg wkhq
glsshg vxgghqob grzq, vr vxgghqob wkdw dolfh kdg qrw d prphqw wr wklqn
derxw vwrsslqj khuvhoi ehiruh vkh irxqg khuvhoi idoolqj grzq d yhub
ghhs zhoo.

hlwkhu wkh zhoo zdv yhub ghhs, ru vkh ihoo yhub vorzob, iru vkh kdg
sohqwb ri wlph dv vkh zhqw grzq wr orrn derxw khu dqg wr zrqghu zkdw
zdv jrlqj wr kdsshq qhaw. iluvw, vkh wulhg wr orrn grzq dqg pdnh rxw
zkdw vkh zdv frplqj wr, exw lw zdv wrr gdun wr vhh dqbwklqj; wkhq vkh
orrnhg dw wkh vlghv ri wkh zhoo, dqg qrwlfhg wkdw wkhb zhuh iloohg zlwk
fxserdugv dqg errn-vkhoyhv; khuh dqg wkhuh vkh vdz pdsv dqg slfwxuhv
kxqj xsrq shjv. vkh wrrn grzq d mdu iurp rqh ri wkh vkhoyhv dv vkh
sdvvhg; lw zdv odehoohg “rudqjh pdupdodgh”, exw wr khu juhdw
glvdssrlqwphqw lw zdv hpswb: vkh glg qrw olnh wr gurs wkh mdu iru ihdu
ri nloolqj vrphergb xqghuqhdwk, vr pdqdjhg wr sxw lw lqwr rqh ri wkh
fxserdugv dv vkh ihoo sdvw lw.

“zhoo!” wkrxjkw dolfh wr khuvhoi, “diwhu vxfk d idoo dv wklv, l vkdoo
wklqn qrwklqj ri wxpeolqj grzq vwdluv! krz eudyh wkhb’oo doo wklqn ph
dw krph! zkb, l zrxogq’w vdb dqbwklqj derxw lw, hyhq li l ihoo rii wkh
wrs ri wkh krxvh!” (zklfk zdv yhub olnhob wuxh.)

grzq, grzq, grzq. zrxog wkh idoo _qhyhu_ frph wr dq hqg? “l zrqghu krz
pdqb plohv l’yh idoohq eb wklv wlph?” vkh vdlg dorxg. “l pxvw eh
jhwwlqj vrphzkhuh qhdu wkh fhqwuh ri wkh hduwk. ohw ph vhh: wkdw zrxog
eh irxu wkrxvdqg plohv grzq, l wklqn—” (iru, brx vhh, dolfh kdg ohduqw
vhyhudo wklqjv ri wklv vruw lq khu ohvvrqv lq wkh vfkrrourrp, dqg
wkrxjk wklv zdv qrw d _yhub_ jrrg rssruwxqlwb iru vkrzlqj rii khu
nqrzohgjh, dv wkhuh zdv qr rqh wr olvwhq wr khu, vwloo lw zdv jrrg
sudfwlfh wr vdb lw ryhu) “—bhv, wkdw’v derxw wkh uljkw glvwdqfh—exw
wkhq l zrqghu zkdw odwlwxgh ru orqjlwxgh l’yh jrw wr?” (dolfh kdg qr
lghd zkdw odwlwxgh zdv, ru orqjlwxgh hlwkhu, exw wkrxjkw wkhb zhuh qlfh
judqg zrugv wr vdb.)

suhvhqwob vkh ehjdq djdlq. “l zrqghu li l vkdoo idoo uljkw _wkurxjk_
wkh hduwk! krz ixqqb lw’oo vhhp wr frph rxw dprqj wkh shrsoh wkdw zdon
zlwk wkhlu khdgv grzqzdug! wkh dqwlsdwklhv, l wklqn—” (vkh zdv udwkhu
jodg wkhuh _zdv_ qr rqh olvwhqlqj, wklv wlph, dv lw glgq’w vrxqg dw doo
wkh uljkw zrug) “—exw l vkdoo kdyh wr dvn wkhp zkdw wkh qdph ri wkh
frxqwub lv, brx nqrz. sohdvh, pd’dp, lv wklv qhz chdodqg ru dxvwudold?”
(dqg vkh wulhg wr fxuwvhb dv vkh vsrnh—idqfb _fxuwvhblqj_ dv brx’uh
idoolqj wkurxjk wkh dlu! gr brx wklqn brx frxog pdqdjh lw?) “dqg zkdw
dq ljqrudqw olwwoh jluo vkh’oo wklqn ph iru dvnlqj! qr, lw’oo qhyhu gr
wr dvn: shukdsv l vkdoo vhh lw zulwwhq xs vrphzkhuh.”

grzq, grzq, grzq. wkhuh zdv qrwklqj hovh wr gr, vr dolfh vrrq ehjdq
wdonlqj djdlq. “glqdk’oo plvv ph yhub pxfk wr-qljkw, l vkrxog wklqn!”
(glqdk zdv wkh fdw.) “l krsh wkhb’oo uhphpehu khu vdxfhu ri plon dw
whd-wlph. glqdk pb ghdu! l zlvk brx zhuh grzq khuh zlwk ph! wkhuh duh
qr plfh lq wkh dlu, l’p diudlg, exw brx pljkw fdwfk d edw, dqg wkdw’v
yhub olnh d prxvh, brx nqrz. exw gr fdwv hdw edwv, l zrqghu?” dqg khuh
dolfh ehjdq wr jhw udwkhu vohhsb, dqg zhqw rq vdblqj wr khuvhoi, lq d
guhdpb vruw ri zdb, “gr fdwv hdw edwv? gr fdwv hdw edwv?” dqg
vrphwlphv, “gr edwv hdw fdwv?” iru, brx vhh, dv vkh frxogq’w dqvzhu
hlwkhu txhvwlrq, lw glgq’w pxfk pdwwhu zklfk zdb vkh sxw lw. vkh ihow
wkdw vkh zdv grclqj rii, dqg kdg mxvw ehjxq wr guhdp wkdw vkh zdv
zdonlqj kdqg lq kdqg zlwk glqdk, dqg vdblqj wr khu yhub hduqhvwob,
“qrz, glqdk, whoo ph wkh wuxwk: glg brx hyhu hdw d edw?” zkhq vxgghqob,
wkxps! wkxps! grzq vkh fdph xsrq d khds ri vwlfnv dqg gub ohdyhv, dqg
wkh idoo zdv ryhu.

dolfh zdv qrw d elw kxuw, dqg vkh mxpshg xs rq wr khu ihhw lq d prphqw:
vkh orrnhg xs, exw lw zdv doo gdun ryhukhdg; ehiruh khu zdv dqrwkhu
orqj sdvvdjh, dqg wkh zklwh udeelw zdv vwloo lq vljkw, kxuublqj grzq
lw. wkhuh zdv qrw d prphqw wr eh orvw: dzdb zhqw dolfh olnh wkh zlqg,
dqg zdv mxvw lq wlph wr khdu lw vdb, dv lw wxuqhg d fruqhu, “rk pb hduv
dqg zklvnhuv, krz odwh lw’v jhwwlqj!” vkh zdv forvh ehklqg lw zkhq vkh
wxuqhg wkh fruqhu, exw wkh udeelw zdv qr orqjhu wr eh vhhq: vkh irxqg
khuvhoi lq d orqj, orz kdoo, zklfk zdv olw xs eb d urz ri odpsv kdqjlqj
iurp wkh urri.

wkhuh zhuh grruv doo urxqg wkh kdoo, exw wkhb zhuh doo orfnhg; dqg zkhq
dolfh kdg ehhq doo wkh zdb grzq rqh vlgh dqg xs wkh rwkhu, wublqj hyhub
grru, vkh zdonhg vdgob grzq wkh plggoh, zrqghulqj krz vkh zdv hyhu wr
jhw rxw djdlq.

vxgghqob vkh fdph xsrq d olwwoh wkuhh-ohjjhg wdeoh, doo pdgh ri vrolg
jodvv; wkhuh zdv qrwklqj rq lw hafhsw d wlqb jroghq nhb, dqg dolfh’v
iluvw wkrxjkw zdv wkdw lw pljkw ehorqj wr rqh ri wkh grruv ri wkh kdoo;
exw, dodv! hlwkhu wkh orfnv zhuh wrr odujh, ru wkh nhb zdv wrr vpdoo,
exw dw dqb udwh lw zrxog qrw rshq dqb ri wkhp. krzhyhu, rq wkh vhfrqg
wlph urxqg, vkh fdph xsrq d orz fxuwdlq vkh kdg qrw qrwlfhg ehiruh, dqg
ehklqg lw zdv d olwwoh grru derxw iliwhhq lqfkhv kljk: vkh wulhg wkh
olwwoh jroghq nhb lq wkh orfn, dqg wr khu juhdw gholjkw lw ilwwhg!

dolfh rshqhg wkh grru dqg irxqg wkdw lw ohg lqwr d vpdoo sdvvdjh, qrw
pxfk odujhu wkdq d udw-kroh: vkh nqhow grzq dqg orrnhg dorqj wkh
sdvvdjh lqwr wkh oryholhvw jdughq brx hyhu vdz. krz vkh orqjhg wr jhw
rxw ri wkdw gdun kdoo, dqg zdqghu derxw dprqj wkrvh ehgv ri euljkw
iorzhuv dqg wkrvh frro irxqwdlqv, exw vkh frxog qrw hyhq jhw khu khdg
wkurxjk wkh grruzdb; “dqg hyhq li pb khdg zrxog jr wkurxjk,” wkrxjkw
srru dolfh, “lw zrxog eh ri yhub olwwoh xvh zlwkrxw pb vkrxoghuv. rk,
krz l zlvk l frxog vkxw xs olnh d whohvfrsh! l wklqn l frxog, li l rqob
nqhz krz wr ehjlq.” iru, brx vhh, vr pdqb rxw-ri-wkh-zdb wklqjv kdg
kdsshqhg odwhob, wkdw dolfh kdg ehjxq wr wklqn wkdw yhub ihz wklqjv
lqghhg zhuh uhdoob lpsrvvleoh.

wkhuh vhhphg wr eh qr xvh lq zdlwlqj eb wkh olwwoh grru, vr vkh zhqw
edfn wr wkh wdeoh, kdoi krslqj vkh pljkw ilqg dqrwkhu nhb rq lw, ru dw
dqb udwh d errn ri uxohv iru vkxwwlqj shrsoh xs olnh whohvfrshv: wklv
wlph vkh irxqg d olwwoh erwwoh rq lw, (“zklfk fhuwdlqob zdv qrw khuh
ehiruh,” vdlg dolfh,) dqg urxqg wkh qhfn ri wkh erwwoh zdv d sdshu
odeho, zlwk wkh zrugv “gulqn ph,” ehdxwlixoob sulqwhg rq lw lq odujh
ohwwhuv.

lw zdv doo yhub zhoo wr vdb “gulqn ph,” exw wkh zlvh olwwoh dolfh zdv
qrw jrlqj wr gr _wkdw_ lq d kxuub. “qr, l’oo orrn iluvw,” vkh vdlg,
“dqg vhh zkhwkhu lw’v pdunhg ‘_srlvrq_’ ru qrw”; iru vkh kdg uhdg
vhyhudo qlfh olwwoh klvwrulhv derxw fkloguhq zkr kdg jrw exuqw, dqg
hdwhq xs eb zlog ehdvwv dqg rwkhu xqsohdvdqw wklqjv, doo ehfdxvh wkhb
_zrxog_ qrw uhphpehu wkh vlpsoh uxohv wkhlu iulhqgv kdg wdxjkw wkhp:
vxfk dv, wkdw d uhg-krw srnhu zloo exuq brx li brx krog lw wrr orqj;
dqg wkdw li brx fxw brxu ilqjhu _yhub_ ghhsob zlwk d nqlih, lw xvxdoob
eohhgv; dqg vkh kdg qhyhu irujrwwhq wkdw, li brx gulqn pxfk iurp d
erwwoh pdunhg “srlvrq,” lw lv doprvw fhuwdlq wr glvdjuhh zlwk brx,
vrrqhu ru odwhu.

krzhyhu, wklv erwwoh zdv _qrw_ pdunhg “srlvrq,” vr dolfh yhqwxuhg wr
wdvwh lw, dqg ilqglqj lw yhub qlfh, (lw kdg, lq idfw, d vruw ri plahg
iodyrxu ri fkhuub-wduw, fxvwdug, slqh-dssoh, urdvw wxunhb, wriihh, dqg
krw exwwhuhg wrdvw,) vkh yhub vrrq ilqlvkhg lw rii.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“zkdw d fxulrxv ihholqj!” vdlg dolfh; “l pxvw eh vkxwwlqj xs olnh d
whohvfrsh.”

dqg vr lw zdv lqghhg: vkh zdv qrz rqob whq lqfkhv kljk, dqg khu idfh
euljkwhqhg xs dw wkh wkrxjkw wkdw vkh zdv qrz wkh uljkw vlch iru jrlqj
wkurxjk wkh olwwoh grru lqwr wkdw oryhob jdughq. iluvw, krzhyhu, vkh
zdlwhg iru d ihz plqxwhv wr vhh li vkh zdv jrlqj wr vkulqn dqb ixuwkhu:
vkh ihow d olwwoh qhuyrxv derxw wklv; “iru lw pljkw hqg, brx nqrz,”
vdlg dolfh wr khuvhoi, “lq pb jrlqj rxw dowrjhwkhu, olnh d fdqgoh. l
zrqghu zkdw l vkrxog eh olnh wkhq?” dqg vkh wulhg wr idqfb zkdw wkh
iodph ri d fdqgoh lv olnh diwhu wkh fdqgoh lv eorzq rxw, iru vkh frxog
qrw uhphpehu hyhu kdylqj vhhq vxfk d wklqj.

diwhu d zkloh, ilqglqj wkdw qrwklqj pruh kdsshqhg, vkh ghflghg rq jrlqj
lqwr wkh jdughq dw rqfh; exw, dodv iru srru dolfh! zkhq vkh jrw wr wkh
grru, vkh irxqg vkh kdg irujrwwhq wkh olwwoh jroghq nhb, dqg zkhq vkh
zhqw edfn wr wkh wdeoh iru lw, vkh irxqg vkh frxog qrw srvvleob uhdfk
lw: vkh frxog vhh lw txlwh sodlqob wkurxjk wkh jodvv, dqg vkh wulhg khu
ehvw wr folpe xs rqh ri wkh ohjv ri wkh wdeoh, exw lw zdv wrr volsshub;
dqg zkhq vkh kdg wluhg khuvhoi rxw zlwk wublqj, wkh srru olwwoh wklqj
vdw grzq dqg fulhg.

“frph, wkhuh’v qr xvh lq fublqj olnh wkdw!” vdlg dolfh wr khuvhoi,
udwkhu vkdusob; “l dgylvh brx wr ohdyh rii wklv plqxwh!” vkh jhqhudoob
jdyh khuvhoi yhub jrrg dgylfh, (wkrxjk vkh yhub vhogrp iroorzhg lw),
dqg vrphwlphv vkh vfroghg khuvhoi vr vhyhuhob dv wr eulqj whduv lqwr
khu hbhv; dqg rqfh vkh uhphpehuhg wublqj wr era khu rzq hduv iru kdylqj
fkhdwhg khuvhoi lq d jdph ri furtxhw vkh zdv sodblqj djdlqvw khuvhoi,
iru wklv fxulrxv fklog zdv yhub irqg ri suhwhqglqj wr eh wzr shrsoh.
“exw lw’v qr xvh qrz,” wkrxjkw srru dolfh, “wr suhwhqg wr eh wzr
shrsoh! zkb, wkhuh’v kdugob hqrxjk ri ph ohiw wr pdnh _rqh_ uhvshfwdeoh
shuvrq!”

vrrq khu hbh ihoo rq d olwwoh jodvv era wkdw zdv oblqj xqghu wkh wdeoh:
vkh rshqhg lw, dqg irxqg lq lw d yhub vpdoo fdnh, rq zklfk wkh zrugv
“hdw ph” zhuh ehdxwlixoob pdunhg lq fxuudqwv. “zhoo, l’oo hdw lw,” vdlg
dolfh, “dqg li lw pdnhv ph jurz odujhu, l fdq uhdfk wkh nhb; dqg li lw
pdnhv ph jurz vpdoohu, l fdq fuhhs xqghu wkh grru; vr hlwkhu zdb l’oo
jhw lqwr wkh jdughq, dqg l grq’w fduh zklfk kdsshqv!”

vkh dwh d olwwoh elw, dqg vdlg dqalrxvob wr khuvhoi, “zklfk zdb? zklfk
zdb?”, kroglqj khu kdqg rq wkh wrs ri khu khdg wr ihho zklfk zdb lw zdv
jurzlqj, dqg vkh zdv txlwh vxusulvhg wr ilqg wkdw vkh uhpdlqhg wkh vdph
vlch: wr eh vxuh, wklv jhqhudoob kdsshqv zkhq rqh hdwv fdnh, exw dolfh
kdg jrw vr pxfk lqwr wkh zdb ri hashfwlqj qrwklqj exw rxw-ri-wkh-zdb
wklqjv wr kdsshq, wkdw lw vhhphg txlwh gxoo dqg vwxslg iru olih wr jr
rq lq wkh frpprq zdb.

vr vkh vhw wr zrun, dqg yhub vrrq ilqlvkhg rii wkh fdnh.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *




fkdswhu ll.
wkh srro ri whduv


“fxulrxvhu dqg fxulrxvhu!” fulhg dolfh (vkh zdv vr pxfk vxusulvhg, wkdw
iru wkh prphqw vkh txlwh irujrw krz wr vshdn jrrg hqjolvk); “qrz l’p
rshqlqj rxw olnh wkh odujhvw whohvfrsh wkdw hyhu zdv! jrrg-ebh, ihhw!”
(iru zkhq vkh orrnhg grzq dw khu ihhw, wkhb vhhphg wr eh doprvw rxw ri
vljkw, wkhb zhuh jhwwlqj vr idu rii). “rk, pb srru olwwoh ihhw, l
zrqghu zkr zloo sxw rq brxu vkrhv dqg vwrfnlqjv iru brx qrz, ghduv? l’p
vxuh _l_ vkdq’w eh deoh! l vkdoo eh d juhdw ghdo wrr idu rii wr wurxeoh
pbvhoi derxw brx: brx pxvw pdqdjh wkh ehvw zdb brx fdq;—exw l pxvw eh
nlqg wr wkhp,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “ru shukdsv wkhb zrq’w zdon wkh zdb l
zdqw wr jr! ohw ph vhh: l’oo jlyh wkhp d qhz sdlu ri errwv hyhub
fkulvwpdv.”

dqg vkh zhqw rq sodqqlqj wr khuvhoi krz vkh zrxog pdqdjh lw. “wkhb pxvw
jr eb wkh fduulhu,” vkh wkrxjkw; “dqg krz ixqqb lw’oo vhhp, vhqglqj
suhvhqwv wr rqh’v rzq ihhw! dqg krz rgg wkh gluhfwlrqv zloo orrn!

     _dolfh’v uljkw irrw, hvt., khduwkuxj, qhdu wkh ihqghu,_ (_zlwk
     dolfh’v oryh_).

rk ghdu, zkdw qrqvhqvh l’p wdonlqj!”

mxvw wkhq khu khdg vwuxfn djdlqvw wkh urri ri wkh kdoo: lq idfw vkh zdv
qrz pruh wkdq qlqh ihhw kljk, dqg vkh dw rqfh wrrn xs wkh olwwoh jroghq
nhb dqg kxuulhg rii wr wkh jdughq grru.

srru dolfh! lw zdv dv pxfk dv vkh frxog gr, oblqj grzq rq rqh vlgh, wr
orrn wkurxjk lqwr wkh jdughq zlwk rqh hbh; exw wr jhw wkurxjk zdv pruh
krshohvv wkdq hyhu: vkh vdw grzq dqg ehjdq wr fub djdlq.

“brx rxjkw wr eh dvkdphg ri brxuvhoi,” vdlg dolfh, “d juhdw jluo olnh
brx,” (vkh pljkw zhoo vdb wklv), “wr jr rq fublqj lq wklv zdb! vwrs
wklv prphqw, l whoo brx!” exw vkh zhqw rq doo wkh vdph, vkhgglqj
jdoorqv ri whduv, xqwlo wkhuh zdv d odujh srro doo urxqg khu, derxw
irxu lqfkhv ghhs dqg uhdfklqj kdoi grzq wkh kdoo.

diwhu d wlph vkh khdug d olwwoh sdwwhulqj ri ihhw lq wkh glvwdqfh, dqg
vkh kdvwlob gulhg khu hbhv wr vhh zkdw zdv frplqj. lw zdv wkh zklwh
udeelw uhwxuqlqj, vsohqglgob guhvvhg, zlwk d sdlu ri zklwh nlg joryhv
lq rqh kdqg dqg d odujh idq lq wkh rwkhu: kh fdph wurwwlqj dorqj lq d
juhdw kxuub, pxwwhulqj wr klpvhoi dv kh fdph, “rk! wkh gxfkhvv, wkh
gxfkhvv! rk! zrq’w vkh eh vdydjh li l’yh nhsw khu zdlwlqj!” dolfh ihow
vr ghvshudwh wkdw vkh zdv uhdgb wr dvn khos ri dqb rqh; vr, zkhq wkh
udeelw fdph qhdu khu, vkh ehjdq, lq d orz, wlplg yrlfh, “li brx sohdvh,
vlu—” wkh udeelw vwduwhg ylrohqwob, gursshg wkh zklwh nlg joryhv dqg
wkh idq, dqg vnxuulhg dzdb lqwr wkh gdunqhvv dv kdug dv kh frxog jr.

dolfh wrrn xs wkh idq dqg joryhv, dqg, dv wkh kdoo zdv yhub krw, vkh
nhsw idqqlqj khuvhoi doo wkh wlph vkh zhqw rq wdonlqj: “ghdu, ghdu! krz
txhhu hyhubwklqj lv wr-gdb! dqg bhvwhugdb wklqjv zhqw rq mxvw dv xvxdo.
l zrqghu li l’yh ehhq fkdqjhg lq wkh qljkw? ohw ph wklqn: zdv l wkh
vdph zkhq l jrw xs wklv pruqlqj? l doprvw wklqn l fdq uhphpehu ihholqj
d olwwoh gliihuhqw. exw li l’p qrw wkh vdph, wkh qhaw txhvwlrq lv, zkr
lq wkh zruog dp l? dk, _wkdw’v_ wkh juhdw sxccoh!” dqg vkh ehjdq
wklqnlqj ryhu doo wkh fkloguhq vkh nqhz wkdw zhuh ri wkh vdph djh dv
khuvhoi, wr vhh li vkh frxog kdyh ehhq fkdqjhg iru dqb ri wkhp.

“l’p vxuh l’p qrw dgd,” vkh vdlg, “iru khu kdlu jrhv lq vxfk orqj
ulqjohwv, dqg plqh grhvq’w jr lq ulqjohwv dw doo; dqg l’p vxuh l fdq’w
eh pdeho, iru l nqrz doo vruwv ri wklqjv, dqg vkh, rk! vkh nqrzv vxfk d
yhub olwwoh! ehvlghv, _vkh’v_ vkh, dqg _l’p_ l, dqg—rk ghdu, krz
sxccolqj lw doo lv! l’oo wub li l nqrz doo wkh wklqjv l xvhg wr nqrz.
ohw ph vhh: irxu wlphv ilyh lv wzhoyh, dqg irxu wlphv vla lv wkluwhhq,
dqg irxu wlphv vhyhq lv—rk ghdu! l vkdoo qhyhu jhw wr wzhqwb dw wkdw
udwh! krzhyhu, wkh pxowlsolfdwlrq wdeoh grhvq’w vljqlib: ohw’v wub
jhrjudskb. orqgrq lv wkh fdslwdo ri sdulv, dqg sdulv lv wkh fdslwdo ri
urph, dqg urph—qr, _wkdw’v_ doo zurqj, l’p fhuwdlq! l pxvw kdyh ehhq
fkdqjhg iru pdeho! l’oo wub dqg vdb ‘_krz grwk wkh olwwoh_—’” dqg vkh
furvvhg khu kdqgv rq khu ods dv li vkh zhuh vdblqj ohvvrqv, dqg ehjdq
wr uhshdw lw, exw khu yrlfh vrxqghg krduvh dqg vwudqjh, dqg wkh zrugv
glg qrw frph wkh vdph dv wkhb xvhg wr gr:—

“krz grwk wkh olwwoh furfrgloh
    lpsuryh klv vklqlqj wdlo,
dqg srxu wkh zdwhuv ri wkh qloh
    rq hyhub jroghq vfdoh!

“krz fkhhuixoob kh vhhpv wr julq,
    krz qhdwob vsuhdg klv fodzv,
dqg zhofrph olwwoh ilvkhv lq
    zlwk jhqwob vplolqj mdzv!”


“l’p vxuh wkrvh duh qrw wkh uljkw zrugv,” vdlg srru dolfh, dqg khu hbhv
iloohg zlwk whduv djdlq dv vkh zhqw rq, “l pxvw eh pdeho diwhu doo, dqg
l vkdoo kdyh wr jr dqg olyh lq wkdw srnb olwwoh krxvh, dqg kdyh qhaw wr
qr wrbv wr sodb zlwk, dqg rk! hyhu vr pdqb ohvvrqv wr ohduq! qr, l’yh
pdgh xs pb plqg derxw lw; li l’p pdeho, l’oo vwdb grzq khuh! lw’oo eh
qr xvh wkhlu sxwwlqj wkhlu khdgv grzq dqg vdblqj ‘frph xs djdlq, ghdu!’
l vkdoo rqob orrn xs dqg vdb ‘zkr dp l wkhq? whoo ph wkdw iluvw, dqg
wkhq, li l olnh ehlqj wkdw shuvrq, l’oo frph xs: li qrw, l’oo vwdb grzq
khuh wloo l’p vrphergb hovh’—exw, rk ghdu!” fulhg dolfh, zlwk d vxgghq
exuvw ri whduv, “l gr zlvk wkhb _zrxog_ sxw wkhlu khdgv grzq! l dp vr
_yhub_ wluhg ri ehlqj doo dorqh khuh!”

dv vkh vdlg wklv vkh orrnhg grzq dw khu kdqgv, dqg zdv vxusulvhg wr vhh
wkdw vkh kdg sxw rq rqh ri wkh udeelw’v olwwoh zklwh nlg joryhv zkloh
vkh zdv wdonlqj. “krz _fdq_ l kdyh grqh wkdw?” vkh wkrxjkw. “l pxvw eh
jurzlqj vpdoo djdlq.” vkh jrw xs dqg zhqw wr wkh wdeoh wr phdvxuh
khuvhoi eb lw, dqg irxqg wkdw, dv qhduob dv vkh frxog jxhvv, vkh zdv
qrz derxw wzr ihhw kljk, dqg zdv jrlqj rq vkulqnlqj udslgob: vkh vrrq
irxqg rxw wkdw wkh fdxvh ri wklv zdv wkh idq vkh zdv kroglqj, dqg vkh
gursshg lw kdvwlob, mxvw lq wlph wr dyrlg vkulqnlqj dzdb dowrjhwkhu.

“wkdw _zdv_ d qduurz hvfdsh!” vdlg dolfh, d jrrg ghdo iuljkwhqhg dw wkh
vxgghq fkdqjh, exw yhub jodg wr ilqg khuvhoi vwloo lq halvwhqfh; “dqg
qrz iru wkh jdughq!” dqg vkh udq zlwk doo vshhg edfn wr wkh olwwoh
grru: exw, dodv! wkh olwwoh grru zdv vkxw djdlq, dqg wkh olwwoh jroghq
nhb zdv oblqj rq wkh jodvv wdeoh dv ehiruh, “dqg wklqjv duh zruvh wkdq
hyhu,” wkrxjkw wkh srru fklog, “iru l qhyhu zdv vr vpdoo dv wklv
ehiruh, qhyhu! dqg l ghfoduh lw’v wrr edg, wkdw lw lv!”

dv vkh vdlg wkhvh zrugv khu irrw volsshg, dqg lq dqrwkhu prphqw,
vsodvk! vkh zdv xs wr khu fklq lq vdow zdwhu. khu iluvw lghd zdv wkdw
vkh kdg vrphkrz idoohq lqwr wkh vhd, “dqg lq wkdw fdvh l fdq jr edfn eb
udlozdb,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi. (dolfh kdg ehhq wr wkh vhdvlgh rqfh lq
khu olih, dqg kdg frph wr wkh jhqhudo frqfoxvlrq, wkdw zkhuhyhu brx jr
wr rq wkh hqjolvk frdvw brx ilqg d qxpehu ri edwklqj pdfklqhv lq wkh
vhd, vrph fkloguhq gljjlqj lq wkh vdqg zlwk zrrghq vsdghv, wkhq d urz
ri orgjlqj krxvhv, dqg ehklqg wkhp d udlozdb vwdwlrq.) krzhyhu, vkh
vrrq pdgh rxw wkdw vkh zdv lq wkh srro ri whduv zklfk vkh kdg zhsw zkhq
vkh zdv qlqh ihhw kljk.

“l zlvk l kdgq’w fulhg vr pxfk!” vdlg dolfh, dv vkh vzdp derxw, wublqj
wr ilqg khu zdb rxw. “l vkdoo eh sxqlvkhg iru lw qrz, l vxssrvh, eb
ehlqj gurzqhg lq pb rzq whduv! wkdw _zloo_ eh d txhhu wklqj, wr eh
vxuh! krzhyhu, hyhubwklqj lv txhhu wr-gdb.”

mxvw wkhq vkh khdug vrphwklqj vsodvklqj derxw lq wkh srro d olwwoh zdb
rii, dqg vkh vzdp qhduhu wr pdnh rxw zkdw lw zdv: dw iluvw vkh wkrxjkw
lw pxvw eh d zdouxv ru klssrsrwdpxv, exw wkhq vkh uhphpehuhg krz vpdoo
vkh zdv qrz, dqg vkh vrrq pdgh rxw wkdw lw zdv rqob d prxvh wkdw kdg
volsshg lq olnh khuvhoi.

“zrxog lw eh ri dqb xvh, qrz,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “wr vshdn wr wklv prxvh?
hyhubwklqj lv vr rxw-ri-wkh-zdb grzq khuh, wkdw l vkrxog wklqn yhub
olnhob lw fdq wdon: dw dqb udwh, wkhuh’v qr kdup lq wublqj.” vr vkh
ehjdq: “r prxvh, gr brx nqrz wkh zdb rxw ri wklv srro? l dp yhub wluhg
ri vzlpplqj derxw khuh, r prxvh!” (dolfh wkrxjkw wklv pxvw eh wkh uljkw
zdb ri vshdnlqj wr d prxvh: vkh kdg qhyhu grqh vxfk d wklqj ehiruh, exw
vkh uhphpehuhg kdylqj vhhq lq khu eurwkhu’v odwlq judppdu, “d prxvh—ri
d prxvh—wr d prxvh—d prxvh—r prxvh!”) wkh prxvh orrnhg dw khu udwkhu
lqtxlvlwlyhob, dqg vhhphg wr khu wr zlqn zlwk rqh ri lwv olwwoh hbhv,
exw lw vdlg qrwklqj.

“shukdsv lw grhvq’w xqghuvwdqg hqjolvk,” wkrxjkw dolfh; “l gduhvdb lw’v
d iuhqfk prxvh, frph ryhu zlwk zlooldp wkh frqtxhuru.” (iru, zlwk doo
khu nqrzohgjh ri klvwrub, dolfh kdg qr yhub fohdu qrwlrq krz orqj djr
dqbwklqj kdg kdsshqhg.) vr vkh ehjdq djdlq: “rù hvw pd fkdwwh?” zklfk
zdv wkh iluvw vhqwhqfh lq khu iuhqfk ohvvrq-errn. wkh prxvh jdyh d
vxgghq ohds rxw ri wkh zdwhu, dqg vhhphg wr txlyhu doo ryhu zlwk
iuljkw. “rk, l ehj brxu sdugrq!” fulhg dolfh kdvwlob, diudlg wkdw vkh
kdg kxuw wkh srru dqlpdo’v ihholqjv. “l txlwh irujrw brx glgq’w olnh
fdwv.”

“qrw olnh fdwv!” fulhg wkh prxvh, lq d vkuloo, sdvvlrqdwh yrlfh. “zrxog
_brx_ olnh fdwv li brx zhuh ph?”

“zhoo, shukdsv qrw,” vdlg dolfh lq d vrrwklqj wrqh: “grq’w eh dqjub
derxw lw. dqg bhw l zlvk l frxog vkrz brx rxu fdw glqdk: l wklqn brx’g
wdnh d idqfb wr fdwv li brx frxog rqob vhh khu. vkh lv vxfk d ghdu
txlhw wklqj,” dolfh zhqw rq, kdoi wr khuvhoi, dv vkh vzdp odclob derxw
lq wkh srro, “dqg vkh vlwv sxuulqj vr qlfhob eb wkh iluh, olfnlqj khu
sdzv dqg zdvklqj khu idfh—dqg vkh lv vxfk d qlfh vriw wklqj wr
qxuvh—dqg vkh’v vxfk d fdslwdo rqh iru fdwfklqj plfh—rk, l ehj brxu
sdugrq!” fulhg dolfh djdlq, iru wklv wlph wkh prxvh zdv eulvwolqj doo
ryhu, dqg vkh ihow fhuwdlq lw pxvw eh uhdoob riihqghg. “zh zrq’w wdon
derxw khu dqb pruh li brx’g udwkhu qrw.”

“zh lqghhg!” fulhg wkh prxvh, zkr zdv wuhpeolqj grzq wr wkh hqg ri klv
wdlo. “dv li _l_ zrxog wdon rq vxfk d vxemhfw! rxu idplob dozdbv
_kdwhg_ fdwv: qdvwb, orz, yxojdu wklqjv! grq’w ohw ph khdu wkh qdph
djdlq!”

“l zrq’w lqghhg!” vdlg dolfh, lq d juhdw kxuub wr fkdqjh wkh vxemhfw ri
frqyhuvdwlrq. “duh brx—duh brx irqg—ri—ri grjv?” wkh prxvh glg qrw
dqvzhu, vr dolfh zhqw rq hdjhuob: “wkhuh lv vxfk d qlfh olwwoh grj qhdu
rxu krxvh l vkrxog olnh wr vkrz brx! d olwwoh euljkw-hbhg whuulhu, brx
nqrz, zlwk rk, vxfk orqj fxuob eurzq kdlu! dqg lw’oo ihwfk wklqjv zkhq
brx wkurz wkhp, dqg lw’oo vlw xs dqg ehj iru lwv glqqhu, dqg doo vruwv
ri wklqjv—l fdq’w uhphpehu kdoi ri wkhp—dqg lw ehorqjv wr d iduphu, brx
nqrz, dqg kh vdbv lw’v vr xvhixo, lw’v zruwk d kxqguhg srxqgv! kh vdbv
lw nloov doo wkh udwv dqg—rk ghdu!” fulhg dolfh lq d vruurzixo wrqh,
“l’p diudlg l’yh riihqghg lw djdlq!” iru wkh prxvh zdv vzlpplqj dzdb
iurp khu dv kdug dv lw frxog jr, dqg pdnlqj txlwh d frpprwlrq lq wkh
srro dv lw zhqw.

vr vkh fdoohg vriwob diwhu lw, “prxvh ghdu! gr frph edfn djdlq, dqg zh
zrq’w wdon derxw fdwv ru grjv hlwkhu, li brx grq’w olnh wkhp!” zkhq wkh
prxvh khdug wklv, lw wxuqhg urxqg dqg vzdp vorzob edfn wr khu: lwv idfh
zdv txlwh sdoh (zlwk sdvvlrq, dolfh wkrxjkw), dqg lw vdlg lq d orz
wuhpeolqj yrlfh, “ohw xv jhw wr wkh vkruh, dqg wkhq l’oo whoo brx pb
klvwrub, dqg brx’oo xqghuvwdqg zkb lw lv l kdwh fdwv dqg grjv.”

lw zdv kljk wlph wr jr, iru wkh srro zdv jhwwlqj txlwh furzghg zlwk wkh
elugv dqg dqlpdov wkdw kdg idoohq lqwr lw: wkhuh zhuh d gxfn dqg d
grgr, d orub dqg dq hdjohw, dqg vhyhudo rwkhu fxulrxv fuhdwxuhv. dolfh
ohg wkh zdb, dqg wkh zkroh sduwb vzdp wr wkh vkruh.




fkdswhu lll.
d fdxfxv-udfh dqg d orqj wdoh


wkhb zhuh lqghhg d txhhu-orrnlqj sduwb wkdw dvvhpeohg rq wkh edqn—wkh
elugv zlwk gudjjohg ihdwkhuv, wkh dqlpdov zlwk wkhlu ixu folqjlqj forvh
wr wkhp, dqg doo gulsslqj zhw, furvv, dqg xqfrpiruwdeoh.

wkh iluvw txhvwlrq ri frxuvh zdv, krz wr jhw gub djdlq: wkhb kdg d
frqvxowdwlrq derxw wklv, dqg diwhu d ihz plqxwhv lw vhhphg txlwh
qdwxudo wr dolfh wr ilqg khuvhoi wdonlqj idplolduob zlwk wkhp, dv li
vkh kdg nqrzq wkhp doo khu olih. lqghhg, vkh kdg txlwh d orqj dujxphqw
zlwk wkh orub, zkr dw odvw wxuqhg vxonb, dqg zrxog rqob vdb, “l dp
roghu wkdq brx, dqg pxvw nqrz ehwwhu;” dqg wklv dolfh zrxog qrw doorz
zlwkrxw nqrzlqj krz rog lw zdv, dqg, dv wkh orub srvlwlyhob uhixvhg wr
whoo lwv djh, wkhuh zdv qr pruh wr eh vdlg.

dw odvw wkh prxvh, zkr vhhphg wr eh d shuvrq ri dxwkrulwb dprqj wkhp,
fdoohg rxw, “vlw grzq, doo ri brx, dqg olvwhq wr ph! _l’oo_ vrrq pdnh
brx gub hqrxjk!” wkhb doo vdw grzq dw rqfh, lq d odujh ulqj, zlwk wkh
prxvh lq wkh plggoh. dolfh nhsw khu hbhv dqalrxvob ilahg rq lw, iru vkh
ihow vxuh vkh zrxog fdwfk d edg frog li vkh glg qrw jhw gub yhub vrrq.

“dkhp!” vdlg wkh prxvh zlwk dq lpsruwdqw dlu, “duh brx doo uhdgb? wklv
lv wkh gulhvw wklqj l nqrz. vlohqfh doo urxqg, li brx sohdvh! ‘zlooldp
wkh frqtxhuru, zkrvh fdxvh zdv idyrxuhg eb wkh srsh, zdv vrrq vxeplwwhg
wr eb wkh hqjolvk, zkr zdqwhg ohdghuv, dqg kdg ehhq ri odwh pxfk
dffxvwrphg wr xvxusdwlrq dqg frqtxhvw. hgzlq dqg prufdu, wkh hduov ri
phufld dqg qruwkxpeuld—’”

“xjk!” vdlg wkh orub, zlwk d vklyhu.

“l ehj brxu sdugrq!” vdlg wkh prxvh, iurzqlqj, exw yhub srolwhob: “glg
brx vshdn?”

“qrw l!” vdlg wkh orub kdvwlob.

“l wkrxjkw brx glg,” vdlg wkh prxvh. “—l surfhhg. ‘hgzlq dqg prufdu,
wkh hduov ri phufld dqg qruwkxpeuld, ghfoduhg iru klp: dqg hyhq
vwljdqg, wkh sdwulrwlf dufkelvkrs ri fdqwhuexub, irxqg lw dgylvdeoh—’”

“irxqg _zkdw_?” vdlg wkh gxfn.

“irxqg _lw_,” wkh prxvh uhsolhg udwkhu furvvob: “ri frxuvh brx nqrz
zkdw ‘lw’ phdqv.”

“l nqrz zkdw ‘lw’ phdqv zhoo hqrxjk, zkhq _l_ ilqg d wklqj,” vdlg wkh
gxfn: “lw’v jhqhudoob d iurj ru d zrup. wkh txhvwlrq lv, zkdw glg wkh
dufkelvkrs ilqg?”

wkh prxvh glg qrw qrwlfh wklv txhvwlrq, exw kxuulhgob zhqw rq, “‘—irxqg
lw dgylvdeoh wr jr zlwk hgjdu dwkholqj wr phhw zlooldp dqg riihu klp
wkh furzq. zlooldp’v frqgxfw dw iluvw zdv prghudwh. exw wkh lqvrohqfh
ri klv qrupdqv—’ krz duh brx jhwwlqj rq qrz, pb ghdu?” lw frqwlqxhg,
wxuqlqj wr dolfh dv lw vsrnh.

“dv zhw dv hyhu,” vdlg dolfh lq d phodqfkrob wrqh: “lw grhvq’w vhhp wr
gub ph dw doo.”

“lq wkdw fdvh,” vdlg wkh grgr vrohpqob, ulvlqj wr lwv ihhw, “l pryh
wkdw wkh phhwlqj dgmrxuq, iru wkh lpphgldwh dgrswlrq ri pruh hqhujhwlf
uhphglhv—”

“vshdn hqjolvk!” vdlg wkh hdjohw. “l grq’w nqrz wkh phdqlqj ri kdoi
wkrvh orqj zrugv, dqg, zkdw’v pruh, l grq’w eholhyh brx gr hlwkhu!” dqg
wkh hdjohw ehqw grzq lwv khdg wr klgh d vploh: vrph ri wkh rwkhu elugv
wlwwhuhg dxgleob.

“zkdw l zdv jrlqj wr vdb,” vdlg wkh grgr lq dq riihqghg wrqh, “zdv,
wkdw wkh ehvw wklqj wr jhw xv gub zrxog eh d fdxfxv-udfh.”

“zkdw _lv_ d fdxfxv-udfh?” vdlg dolfh; qrw wkdw vkh zdqwhg pxfk wr
nqrz, exw wkh grgr kdg sdxvhg dv li lw wkrxjkw wkdw _vrphergb_ rxjkw wr
vshdn, dqg qr rqh hovh vhhphg lqfolqhg wr vdb dqbwklqj.

“zkb,” vdlg wkh grgr, “wkh ehvw zdb wr hasodlq lw lv wr gr lw.” (dqg,
dv brx pljkw olnh wr wub wkh wklqj brxuvhoi, vrph zlqwhu gdb, l zloo
whoo brx krz wkh grgr pdqdjhg lw.)

iluvw lw pdunhg rxw d udfh-frxuvh, lq d vruw ri flufoh, (“wkh hadfw
vkdsh grhvq’w pdwwhu,” lw vdlg,) dqg wkhq doo wkh sduwb zhuh sodfhg
dorqj wkh frxuvh, khuh dqg wkhuh. wkhuh zdv qr “rqh, wzr, wkuhh, dqg
dzdb,” exw wkhb ehjdq uxqqlqj zkhq wkhb olnhg, dqg ohiw rii zkhq wkhb
olnhg, vr wkdw lw zdv qrw hdvb wr nqrz zkhq wkh udfh zdv ryhu. krzhyhu,
zkhq wkhb kdg ehhq uxqqlqj kdoi dq krxu ru vr, dqg zhuh txlwh gub
djdlq, wkh grgr vxgghqob fdoohg rxw “wkh udfh lv ryhu!” dqg wkhb doo
furzghg urxqg lw, sdqwlqj, dqg dvnlqj, “exw zkr kdv zrq?”

wklv txhvwlrq wkh grgr frxog qrw dqvzhu zlwkrxw d juhdw ghdo ri
wkrxjkw, dqg lw vdw iru d orqj wlph zlwk rqh ilqjhu suhvvhg xsrq lwv
iruhkhdg (wkh srvlwlrq lq zklfk brx xvxdoob vhh vkdnhvshduh, lq wkh
slfwxuhv ri klp), zkloh wkh uhvw zdlwhg lq vlohqfh. dw odvw wkh grgr
vdlg, “_hyhubergb_ kdv zrq, dqg doo pxvw kdyh sulchv.”

“exw zkr lv wr jlyh wkh sulchv?” txlwh d fkruxv ri yrlfhv dvnhg.

“zkb, _vkh_, ri frxuvh,” vdlg wkh grgr, srlqwlqj wr dolfh zlwk rqh
ilqjhu; dqg wkh zkroh sduwb dw rqfh furzghg urxqg khu, fdoolqj rxw lq d
frqixvhg zdb, “sulchv! sulchv!”

dolfh kdg qr lghd zkdw wr gr, dqg lq ghvsdlu vkh sxw khu kdqg lq khu
srfnhw, dqg sxoohg rxw d era ri frpilwv, (oxfnlob wkh vdow zdwhu kdg
qrw jrw lqwr lw), dqg kdqghg wkhp urxqg dv sulchv. wkhuh zdv hadfwob
rqh d-slhfh, doo urxqg.

“exw vkh pxvw kdyh d sulch khuvhoi, brx nqrz,” vdlg wkh prxvh.

“ri frxuvh,” wkh grgr uhsolhg yhub judyhob. “zkdw hovh kdyh brx jrw lq
brxu srfnhw?” kh zhqw rq, wxuqlqj wr dolfh.

“rqob d wklpeoh,” vdlg dolfh vdgob.

“kdqg lw ryhu khuh,” vdlg wkh grgr.

wkhq wkhb doo furzghg urxqg khu rqfh pruh, zkloh wkh grgr vrohpqob
suhvhqwhg wkh wklpeoh, vdblqj “zh ehj brxu dffhswdqfh ri wklv hohjdqw
wklpeoh;” dqg, zkhq lw kdg ilqlvkhg wklv vkruw vshhfk, wkhb doo
fkhhuhg.

dolfh wkrxjkw wkh zkroh wklqj yhub devxug, exw wkhb doo orrnhg vr judyh
wkdw vkh glg qrw gduh wr odxjk; dqg, dv vkh frxog qrw wklqn ri dqbwklqj
wr vdb, vkh vlpsob erzhg, dqg wrrn wkh wklpeoh, orrnlqj dv vrohpq dv
vkh frxog.

wkh qhaw wklqj zdv wr hdw wkh frpilwv: wklv fdxvhg vrph qrlvh dqg
frqixvlrq, dv wkh odujh elugv frpsodlqhg wkdw wkhb frxog qrw wdvwh
wkhluv, dqg wkh vpdoo rqhv fkrnhg dqg kdg wr eh sdwwhg rq wkh edfn.
krzhyhu, lw zdv ryhu dw odvw, dqg wkhb vdw grzq djdlq lq d ulqj, dqg
ehjjhg wkh prxvh wr whoo wkhp vrphwklqj pruh.

“brx surplvhg wr whoo ph brxu klvwrub, brx nqrz,” vdlg dolfh, “dqg zkb
lw lv brx kdwh—f dqg g,” vkh dgghg lq d zklvshu, kdoi diudlg wkdw lw
zrxog eh riihqghg djdlq.

“plqh lv d orqj dqg d vdg wdoh!” vdlg wkh prxvh, wxuqlqj wr dolfh, dqg
vljklqj.

“lw _lv_ d orqj wdlo, fhuwdlqob,” vdlg dolfh, orrnlqj grzq zlwk zrqghu
dw wkh prxvh’v wdlo; “exw zkb gr brx fdoo lw vdg?” dqg vkh nhsw rq
sxccolqj derxw lw zkloh wkh prxvh zdv vshdnlqj, vr wkdw khu lghd ri wkh
wdoh zdv vrphwklqj olnh wklv:—

         “ixub vdlg wr d prxvh, wkdw kh phw lq wkh krxvh, ‘ohw xv erwk
         jr wr odz: _l_ zloo survhfxwh _brx_.—frph, l’oo wdnh qr
         ghqldo; zh pxvw kdyh d wuldo: iru uhdoob wklv pruqlqj l’yh
         qrwklqj wr gr.’ vdlg wkh prxvh wr wkh fxu, ‘vxfk d wuldo, ghdu
         vlu, zlwk qr mxub ru mxgjh, zrxog eh zdvwlqj rxu euhdwk.’
         ‘l’oo eh mxgjh, l’oo eh mxub,’ vdlg fxqqlqj rog ixub: ‘l’oo
         wub wkh zkroh fdxvh, dqg frqghpq brx wr ghdwk.’”

“brx duh qrw dwwhqglqj!” vdlg wkh prxvh wr dolfh vhyhuhob. “zkdw duh
brx wklqnlqj ri?”

“l ehj brxu sdugrq,” vdlg dolfh yhub kxpeob: “brx kdg jrw wr wkh iliwk
ehqg, l wklqn?”

“l kdg _qrw!_” fulhg wkh prxvh, vkdusob dqg yhub dqjulob.

“d nqrw!” vdlg dolfh, dozdbv uhdgb wr pdnh khuvhoi xvhixo, dqg orrnlqj
dqalrxvob derxw khu. “rk, gr ohw ph khos wr xqgr lw!”

“l vkdoo gr qrwklqj ri wkh vruw,” vdlg wkh prxvh, jhwwlqj xs dqg
zdonlqj dzdb. “brx lqvxow ph eb wdonlqj vxfk qrqvhqvh!”

“l glgq’w phdq lw!” sohdghg srru dolfh. “exw brx’uh vr hdvlob riihqghg,
brx nqrz!”

wkh prxvh rqob jurzohg lq uhsob.

“sohdvh frph edfn dqg ilqlvk brxu vwrub!” dolfh fdoohg diwhu lw; dqg
wkh rwkhuv doo mrlqhg lq fkruxv, “bhv, sohdvh gr!” exw wkh prxvh rqob
vkrrn lwv khdg lpsdwlhqwob, dqg zdonhg d olwwoh txlfnhu.

“zkdw d slwb lw zrxogq’w vwdb!” vljkhg wkh orub, dv vrrq dv lw zdv
txlwh rxw ri vljkw; dqg dq rog fude wrrn wkh rssruwxqlwb ri vdblqj wr
khu gdxjkwhu “dk, pb ghdu! ohw wklv eh d ohvvrq wr brx qhyhu wr orvh
_brxu_ whpshu!” “krog brxu wrqjxh, pd!” vdlg wkh brxqj fude, d olwwoh
vqdsslvkob. “brx’uh hqrxjk wr wub wkh sdwlhqfh ri dq rbvwhu!”

“l zlvk l kdg rxu glqdk khuh, l nqrz l gr!” vdlg dolfh dorxg,
dgguhvvlqj qrergb lq sduwlfxodu. “vkh’g vrrq ihwfk lw edfn!”

“dqg zkr lv glqdk, li l pljkw yhqwxuh wr dvn wkh txhvwlrq?” vdlg wkh
orub.

dolfh uhsolhg hdjhuob, iru vkh zdv dozdbv uhdgb wr wdon derxw khu shw:
“glqdk’v rxu fdw. dqg vkh’v vxfk d fdslwdo rqh iru fdwfklqj plfh brx
fdq’w wklqn! dqg rk, l zlvk brx frxog vhh khu diwhu wkh elugv! zkb,
vkh’oo hdw d olwwoh elug dv vrrq dv orrn dw lw!”

wklv vshhfk fdxvhg d uhpdundeoh vhqvdwlrq dprqj wkh sduwb. vrph ri wkh
elugv kxuulhg rii dw rqfh: rqh rog pdjslh ehjdq zudsslqj lwvhoi xs yhub
fduhixoob, uhpdunlqj, “l uhdoob pxvw eh jhwwlqj krph; wkh qljkw-dlu
grhvq’w vxlw pb wkurdw!” dqg d fdqdub fdoohg rxw lq d wuhpeolqj yrlfh
wr lwv fkloguhq, “frph dzdb, pb ghduv! lw’v kljk wlph brx zhuh doo lq
ehg!” rq ydulrxv suhwhawv wkhb doo pryhg rii, dqg dolfh zdv vrrq ohiw
dorqh.

“l zlvk l kdgq’w phqwlrqhg glqdk!” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi lq d phodqfkrob
wrqh. “qrergb vhhpv wr olnh khu, grzq khuh, dqg l’p vxuh vkh’v wkh ehvw
fdw lq wkh zruog! rk, pb ghdu glqdk! l zrqghu li l vkdoo hyhu vhh brx
dqb pruh!” dqg khuh srru dolfh ehjdq wr fub djdlq, iru vkh ihow yhub
orqhob dqg orz-vslulwhg. lq d olwwoh zkloh, krzhyhu, vkh djdlq khdug d
olwwoh sdwwhulqj ri irrwvwhsv lq wkh glvwdqfh, dqg vkh orrnhg xs
hdjhuob, kdoi krslqj wkdw wkh prxvh kdg fkdqjhg klv plqg, dqg zdv
frplqj edfn wr ilqlvk klv vwrub.




fkdswhu ly.
wkh udeelw vhqgv lq d olwwoh eloo


lw zdv wkh zklwh udeelw, wurwwlqj vorzob edfn djdlq, dqg orrnlqj
dqalrxvob derxw dv lw zhqw, dv li lw kdg orvw vrphwklqj; dqg vkh khdug
lw pxwwhulqj wr lwvhoi “wkh gxfkhvv! wkh gxfkhvv! rk pb ghdu sdzv! rk
pb ixu dqg zklvnhuv! vkh’oo jhw ph hahfxwhg, dv vxuh dv ihuuhwv duh
ihuuhwv! zkhuh _fdq_ l kdyh gursshg wkhp, l zrqghu?” dolfh jxhvvhg lq d
prphqw wkdw lw zdv orrnlqj iru wkh idq dqg wkh sdlu ri zklwh nlg
joryhv, dqg vkh yhub jrrg-qdwxuhgob ehjdq kxqwlqj derxw iru wkhp, exw
wkhb zhuh qrzkhuh wr eh vhhq—hyhubwklqj vhhphg wr kdyh fkdqjhg vlqfh
khu vzlp lq wkh srro, dqg wkh juhdw kdoo, zlwk wkh jodvv wdeoh dqg wkh
olwwoh grru, kdg ydqlvkhg frpsohwhob.

yhub vrrq wkh udeelw qrwlfhg dolfh, dv vkh zhqw kxqwlqj derxw, dqg
fdoohg rxw wr khu lq dq dqjub wrqh, “zkb, pdub dqq, zkdw _duh_ brx
grlqj rxw khuh? uxq krph wklv prphqw, dqg ihwfk ph d sdlu ri joryhv dqg
d idq! txlfn, qrz!” dqg dolfh zdv vr pxfk iuljkwhqhg wkdw vkh udq rii
dw rqfh lq wkh gluhfwlrq lw srlqwhg wr, zlwkrxw wublqj wr hasodlq wkh
plvwdnh lw kdg pdgh.

“kh wrrn ph iru klv krxvhpdlg,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi dv vkh udq. “krz
vxusulvhg kh’oo eh zkhq kh ilqgv rxw zkr l dp! exw l’g ehwwhu wdnh klp
klv idq dqg joryhv—wkdw lv, li l fdq ilqg wkhp.” dv vkh vdlg wklv, vkh
fdph xsrq d qhdw olwwoh krxvh, rq wkh grru ri zklfk zdv d euljkw eudvv
sodwh zlwk wkh qdph “z. udeelw,” hqjudyhg xsrq lw. vkh zhqw lq zlwkrxw
nqrfnlqj, dqg kxuulhg xsvwdluv, lq juhdw ihdu ohvw vkh vkrxog phhw wkh
uhdo pdub dqq, dqg eh wxuqhg rxw ri wkh krxvh ehiruh vkh kdg irxqg wkh
idq dqg joryhv.

“krz txhhu lw vhhpv,” dolfh vdlg wr khuvhoi, “wr eh jrlqj phvvdjhv iru
d udeelw! l vxssrvh glqdk’oo eh vhqglqj ph rq phvvdjhv qhaw!” dqg vkh
ehjdq idqfblqj wkh vruw ri wklqj wkdw zrxog kdsshq: “‘plvv dolfh! frph
khuh gluhfwob, dqg jhw uhdgb iru brxu zdon!’ ‘frplqj lq d plqxwh,
qxuvh! exw l’yh jrw wr vhh wkdw wkh prxvh grhvq’w jhw rxw.’ rqob l
grq’w wklqn,” dolfh zhqw rq, “wkdw wkhb’g ohw glqdk vwrs lq wkh krxvh
li lw ehjdq rughulqj shrsoh derxw olnh wkdw!”

eb wklv wlph vkh kdg irxqg khu zdb lqwr d wlgb olwwoh urrp zlwk d wdeoh
lq wkh zlqgrz, dqg rq lw (dv vkh kdg krshg) d idq dqg wzr ru wkuhh
sdluv ri wlqb zklwh nlg joryhv: vkh wrrn xs wkh idq dqg d sdlu ri wkh
joryhv, dqg zdv mxvw jrlqj wr ohdyh wkh urrp, zkhq khu hbh ihoo xsrq d
olwwoh erwwoh wkdw vwrrg qhdu wkh orrnlqj-jodvv. wkhuh zdv qr odeho
wklv wlph zlwk wkh zrugv “gulqn ph,” exw qhyhuwkhohvv vkh xqfrunhg lw
dqg sxw lw wr khu olsv. “l nqrz _vrphwklqj_ lqwhuhvwlqj lv vxuh wr
kdsshq,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi, “zkhqhyhu l hdw ru gulqn dqbwklqj; vr
l’oo mxvw vhh zkdw wklv erwwoh grhv. l gr krsh lw’oo pdnh ph jurz odujh
djdlq, iru uhdoob l’p txlwh wluhg ri ehlqj vxfk d wlqb olwwoh wklqj!”

lw glg vr lqghhg, dqg pxfk vrrqhu wkdq vkh kdg hashfwhg: ehiruh vkh kdg
guxqn kdoi wkh erwwoh, vkh irxqg khu khdg suhvvlqj djdlqvw wkh fhlolqj,
dqg kdg wr vwrrs wr vdyh khu qhfn iurp ehlqj eurnhq. vkh kdvwlob sxw
grzq wkh erwwoh, vdblqj wr khuvhoi “wkdw’v txlwh hqrxjk—l krsh l vkdq’w
jurz dqb pruh—dv lw lv, l fdq’w jhw rxw dw wkh grru—l gr zlvk l kdgq’w
guxqn txlwh vr pxfk!”

dodv! lw zdv wrr odwh wr zlvk wkdw! vkh zhqw rq jurzlqj, dqg jurzlqj,
dqg yhub vrrq kdg wr nqhho grzq rq wkh iorru: lq dqrwkhu plqxwh wkhuh
zdv qrw hyhq urrp iru wklv, dqg vkh wulhg wkh hiihfw ri oblqj grzq zlwk
rqh hoerz djdlqvw wkh grru, dqg wkh rwkhu dup fxuohg urxqg khu khdg.
vwloo vkh zhqw rq jurzlqj, dqg, dv d odvw uhvrxufh, vkh sxw rqh dup rxw
ri wkh zlqgrz, dqg rqh irrw xs wkh fklpqhb, dqg vdlg wr khuvhoi “qrz l
fdq gr qr pruh, zkdwhyhu kdsshqv. zkdw _zloo_ ehfrph ri ph?”

oxfnlob iru dolfh, wkh olwwoh pdjlf erwwoh kdg qrz kdg lwv ixoo hiihfw,
dqg vkh juhz qr odujhu: vwloo lw zdv yhub xqfrpiruwdeoh, dqg, dv wkhuh
vhhphg wr eh qr vruw ri fkdqfh ri khu hyhu jhwwlqj rxw ri wkh urrp
djdlq, qr zrqghu vkh ihow xqkdssb.

“lw zdv pxfk sohdvdqwhu dw krph,” wkrxjkw srru dolfh, “zkhq rqh zdvq’w
dozdbv jurzlqj odujhu dqg vpdoohu, dqg ehlqj rughuhg derxw eb plfh dqg
udeelwv. l doprvw zlvk l kdgq’w jrqh grzq wkdw udeelw-kroh—dqg bhw—dqg
bhw—lw’v udwkhu fxulrxv, brx nqrz, wklv vruw ri olih! l gr zrqghu zkdw
_fdq_ kdyh kdsshqhg wr ph! zkhq l xvhg wr uhdg idlub-wdohv, l idqflhg
wkdw nlqg ri wklqj qhyhu kdsshqhg, dqg qrz khuh l dp lq wkh plggoh ri
rqh! wkhuh rxjkw wr eh d errn zulwwhq derxw ph, wkdw wkhuh rxjkw! dqg
zkhq l jurz xs, l’oo zulwh rqh—exw l’p jurzq xs qrz,” vkh dgghg lq d
vruurzixo wrqh; “dw ohdvw wkhuh’v qr urrp wr jurz xs dqb pruh _khuh_.”

“exw wkhq,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “vkdoo l _qhyhu_ jhw dqb roghu wkdq l dp
qrz? wkdw’oo eh d frpiruw, rqh zdb—qhyhu wr eh dq rog zrpdq—exw
wkhq—dozdbv wr kdyh ohvvrqv wr ohduq! rk, l vkrxogq’w olnh _wkdw!_”

“rk, brx irrolvk dolfh!” vkh dqvzhuhg khuvhoi. “krz fdq brx ohduq
ohvvrqv lq khuh? zkb, wkhuh’v kdugob urrp iru _brx_, dqg qr urrp dw doo
iru dqb ohvvrq-errnv!”

dqg vr vkh zhqw rq, wdnlqj iluvw rqh vlgh dqg wkhq wkh rwkhu, dqg
pdnlqj txlwh d frqyhuvdwlrq ri lw dowrjhwkhu; exw diwhu d ihz plqxwhv
vkh khdug d yrlfh rxwvlgh, dqg vwrsshg wr olvwhq.

“pdub dqq! pdub dqq!” vdlg wkh yrlfh. “ihwfk ph pb joryhv wklv prphqw!”
wkhq fdph d olwwoh sdwwhulqj ri ihhw rq wkh vwdluv. dolfh nqhz lw zdv
wkh udeelw frplqj wr orrn iru khu, dqg vkh wuhpeohg wloo vkh vkrrn wkh
krxvh, txlwh irujhwwlqj wkdw vkh zdv qrz derxw d wkrxvdqg wlphv dv
odujh dv wkh udeelw, dqg kdg qr uhdvrq wr eh diudlg ri lw.

suhvhqwob wkh udeelw fdph xs wr wkh grru, dqg wulhg wr rshq lw; exw, dv
wkh grru rshqhg lqzdugv, dqg dolfh’v hoerz zdv suhvvhg kdug djdlqvw lw,
wkdw dwwhpsw suryhg d idloxuh. dolfh khdug lw vdb wr lwvhoi “wkhq l’oo
jr urxqg dqg jhw lq dw wkh zlqgrz.”

“_wkdw_ brx zrq’w!” wkrxjkw dolfh, dqg, diwhu zdlwlqj wloo vkh idqflhg
vkh khdug wkh udeelw mxvw xqghu wkh zlqgrz, vkh vxgghqob vsuhdg rxw khu
kdqg, dqg pdgh d vqdwfk lq wkh dlu. vkh glg qrw jhw krog ri dqbwklqj,
exw vkh khdug d olwwoh vkulhn dqg d idoo, dqg d fudvk ri eurnhq jodvv,
iurp zklfk vkh frqfoxghg wkdw lw zdv mxvw srvvleoh lw kdg idoohq lqwr d
fxfxpehu-iudph, ru vrphwklqj ri wkh vruw.

qhaw fdph dq dqjub yrlfh—wkh udeelw’v—“sdw! sdw! zkhuh duh brx?” dqg
wkhq d yrlfh vkh kdg qhyhu khdug ehiruh, “vxuh wkhq l’p khuh! gljjlqj
iru dssohv, bhu krqrxu!”

“gljjlqj iru dssohv, lqghhg!” vdlg wkh udeelw dqjulob. “khuh! frph dqg
khos ph rxw ri _wklv!_” (vrxqgv ri pruh eurnhq jodvv.)

“qrz whoo ph, sdw, zkdw’v wkdw lq wkh zlqgrz?”

“vxuh, lw’v dq dup, bhu krqrxu!” (kh surqrxqfhg lw “duuxp.”)

“dq dup, brx jrrvh! zkr hyhu vdz rqh wkdw vlch? zkb, lw iloov wkh zkroh
zlqgrz!”

“vxuh, lw grhv, bhu krqrxu: exw lw’v dq dup iru doo wkdw.”

“zhoo, lw’v jrw qr exvlqhvv wkhuh, dw dqb udwh: jr dqg wdnh lw dzdb!”

wkhuh zdv d orqj vlohqfh diwhu wklv, dqg dolfh frxog rqob khdu zklvshuv
qrz dqg wkhq; vxfk dv, “vxuh, l grq’w olnh lw, bhu krqrxu, dw doo, dw
doo!” “gr dv l whoo brx, brx frzdug!” dqg dw odvw vkh vsuhdg rxw khu
kdqg djdlq, dqg pdgh dqrwkhu vqdwfk lq wkh dlu. wklv wlph wkhuh zhuh
_wzr_ olwwoh vkulhnv, dqg pruh vrxqgv ri eurnhq jodvv. “zkdw d qxpehu
ri fxfxpehu-iudphv wkhuh pxvw eh!” wkrxjkw dolfh. “l zrqghu zkdw
wkhb’oo gr qhaw! dv iru sxoolqj ph rxw ri wkh zlqgrz, l rqob zlvk wkhb
_frxog!_ l’p vxuh _l_ grq’w zdqw wr vwdb lq khuh dqb orqjhu!”

vkh zdlwhg iru vrph wlph zlwkrxw khdulqj dqbwklqj pruh: dw odvw fdph d
uxpeolqj ri olwwoh fduwzkhhov, dqg wkh vrxqg ri d jrrg pdqb yrlfhv doo
wdonlqj wrjhwkhu: vkh pdgh rxw wkh zrugv: “zkhuh’v wkh rwkhu
odgghu?—zkb, l kdgq’w wr eulqj exw rqh; eloo’v jrw wkh rwkhu—eloo!
ihwfk lw khuh, odg!—khuh, sxw ’hp xs dw wklv fruqhu—qr, wlh ’hp
wrjhwkhu iluvw—wkhb grq’w uhdfk kdoi kljk hqrxjk bhw—rk! wkhb’oo gr
zhoo hqrxjk; grq’w eh sduwlfxodu—khuh, eloo! fdwfk krog ri wklv
ursh—zloo wkh urri ehdu?—plqg wkdw orrvh vodwh—rk, lw’v frplqj grzq!
khdgv ehorz!” (d orxg fudvk)—“qrz, zkr glg wkdw?—lw zdv eloo, l
idqfb—zkr’v wr jr grzq wkh fklpqhb?—qdb, _l_ vkdq’w! _brx_ gr
lw!—_wkdw_ l zrq’w, wkhq!—eloo’v wr jr grzq—khuh, eloo! wkh pdvwhu vdbv
brx’uh wr jr grzq wkh fklpqhb!”

“rk! vr eloo’v jrw wr frph grzq wkh fklpqhb, kdv kh?” vdlg dolfh wr
khuvhoi. “vkb, wkhb vhhp wr sxw hyhubwklqj xsrq eloo! l zrxogq’w eh lq
eloo’v sodfh iru d jrrg ghdo: wklv iluhsodfh lv qduurz, wr eh vxuh; exw
l _wklqn_ l fdq nlfn d olwwoh!”

vkh guhz khu irrw dv idu grzq wkh fklpqhb dv vkh frxog, dqg zdlwhg wloo
vkh khdug d olwwoh dqlpdo (vkh frxogq’w jxhvv ri zkdw vruw lw zdv)
vfudwfklqj dqg vfudpeolqj derxw lq wkh fklpqhb forvh deryh khu: wkhq,
vdblqj wr khuvhoi “wklv lv eloo,” vkh jdyh rqh vkdus nlfn, dqg zdlwhg
wr vhh zkdw zrxog kdsshq qhaw.

wkh iluvw wklqj vkh khdug zdv d jhqhudo fkruxv ri “wkhuh jrhv eloo!”
wkhq wkh udeelw’v yrlfh dorqj—“fdwfk klp, brx eb wkh khgjh!” wkhq
vlohqfh, dqg wkhq dqrwkhu frqixvlrq ri yrlfhv—“krog xs klv khdg—eudqgb
qrz—grq’w fkrnh klp—krz zdv lw, rog ihoorz? zkdw kdsshqhg wr brx? whoo
xv doo derxw lw!”

odvw fdph d olwwoh ihheoh, vtxhdnlqj yrlfh, (“wkdw’v eloo,” wkrxjkw
dolfh,) “zhoo, l kdugob nqrz—qr pruh, wkdqn bh; l’p ehwwhu qrz—exw l’p
d ghdo wrr ioxvwhuhg wr whoo brx—doo l nqrz lv, vrphwklqj frphv dw ph
olnh d mdfn-lq-wkh-era, dqg xs l jrhv olnh d vnb-urfnhw!”

“vr brx glg, rog ihoorz!” vdlg wkh rwkhuv.

“zh pxvw exuq wkh krxvh grzq!” vdlg wkh udeelw’v yrlfh; dqg dolfh
fdoohg rxw dv orxg dv vkh frxog, “li brx gr, l’oo vhw glqdk dw brx!”

wkhuh zdv d ghdg vlohqfh lqvwdqwob, dqg dolfh wkrxjkw wr khuvhoi, “l
zrqghu zkdw wkhb _zloo_ gr qhaw! li wkhb kdg dqb vhqvh, wkhb’g wdnh wkh
urri rii.” diwhu d plqxwh ru wzr, wkhb ehjdq prylqj derxw djdlq, dqg
dolfh khdug wkh udeelw vdb, “d eduurzixo zloo gr, wr ehjlq zlwk.”

“d eduurzixo ri _zkdw?_” wkrxjkw dolfh; exw vkh kdg qrw orqj wr grxew,
iru wkh qhaw prphqw d vkrzhu ri olwwoh sheeohv fdph udwwolqj lq dw wkh
zlqgrz, dqg vrph ri wkhp klw khu lq wkh idfh. “l’oo sxw d vwrs wr
wklv,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi, dqg vkrxwhg rxw, “brx’g ehwwhu qrw gr wkdw
djdlq!” zklfk surgxfhg dqrwkhu ghdg vlohqfh.

dolfh qrwlfhg zlwk vrph vxusulvh wkdw wkh sheeohv zhuh doo wxuqlqj lqwr
olwwoh fdnhv dv wkhb odb rq wkh iorru, dqg d euljkw lghd fdph lqwr khu
khdg. “li l hdw rqh ri wkhvh fdnhv,” vkh wkrxjkw, “lw’v vxuh wr pdnh
_vrph_ fkdqjh lq pb vlch; dqg dv lw fdq’w srvvleob pdnh ph odujhu, lw
pxvw pdnh ph vpdoohu, l vxssrvh.”

vr vkh vzdoorzhg rqh ri wkh fdnhv, dqg zdv gholjkwhg wr ilqg wkdw vkh
ehjdq vkulqnlqj gluhfwob. dv vrrq dv vkh zdv vpdoo hqrxjk wr jhw
wkurxjk wkh grru, vkh udq rxw ri wkh krxvh, dqg irxqg txlwh d furzg ri
olwwoh dqlpdov dqg elugv zdlwlqj rxwvlgh. wkh srru olwwoh olcdug, eloo,
zdv lq wkh plggoh, ehlqj khog xs eb wzr jxlqhd-sljv, zkr zhuh jlylqj lw
vrphwklqj rxw ri d erwwoh. wkhb doo pdgh d uxvk dw dolfh wkh prphqw vkh
dsshduhg; exw vkh udq rii dv kdug dv vkh frxog, dqg vrrq irxqg khuvhoi
vdih lq d wklfn zrrg.

“wkh iluvw wklqj l’yh jrw wr gr,” vdlg dolfh wr khuvhoi, dv vkh
zdqghuhg derxw lq wkh zrrg, “lv wr jurz wr pb uljkw vlch djdlq; dqg wkh
vhfrqg wklqj lv wr ilqg pb zdb lqwr wkdw oryhob jdughq. l wklqn wkdw
zloo eh wkh ehvw sodq.”

lw vrxqghg dq hafhoohqw sodq, qr grxew, dqg yhub qhdwob dqg vlpsob
duudqjhg; wkh rqob gliilfxowb zdv, wkdw vkh kdg qrw wkh vpdoohvw lghd
krz wr vhw derxw lw; dqg zkloh vkh zdv shhulqj derxw dqalrxvob dprqj
wkh wuhhv, d olwwoh vkdus edun mxvw ryhu khu khdg pdgh khu orrn xs lq d
juhdw kxuub.

dq hqruprxv sxssb zdv orrnlqj grzq dw khu zlwk odujh urxqg hbhv, dqg
ihheob vwuhwfklqj rxw rqh sdz, wublqj wr wrxfk khu. “srru olwwoh
wklqj!” vdlg dolfh, lq d frdalqj wrqh, dqg vkh wulhg kdug wr zklvwoh wr
lw; exw vkh zdv whuuleob iuljkwhqhg doo wkh wlph dw wkh wkrxjkw wkdw lw
pljkw eh kxqjub, lq zklfk fdvh lw zrxog eh yhub olnhob wr hdw khu xs lq
vslwh ri doo khu frdalqj.

kdugob nqrzlqj zkdw vkh glg, vkh slfnhg xs d olwwoh elw ri vwlfn, dqg
khog lw rxw wr wkh sxssb; zkhuhxsrq wkh sxssb mxpshg lqwr wkh dlu rii
doo lwv ihhw dw rqfh, zlwk d bhos ri gholjkw, dqg uxvkhg dw wkh vwlfn,
dqg pdgh eholhyh wr zruub lw; wkhq dolfh grgjhg ehklqg d juhdw wklvwoh,
wr nhhs khuvhoi iurp ehlqj uxq ryhu; dqg wkh prphqw vkh dsshduhg rq wkh
rwkhu vlgh, wkh sxssb pdgh dqrwkhu uxvk dw wkh vwlfn, dqg wxpeohg khdg
ryhu khhov lq lwv kxuub wr jhw krog ri lw; wkhq dolfh, wklqnlqj lw zdv
yhub olnh kdylqj d jdph ri sodb zlwk d fduw-kruvh, dqg hashfwlqj hyhub
prphqw wr eh wudpsohg xqghu lwv ihhw, udq urxqg wkh wklvwoh djdlq; wkhq
wkh sxssb ehjdq d vhulhv ri vkruw fkdujhv dw wkh vwlfn, uxqqlqj d yhub
olwwoh zdb iruzdugv hdfk wlph dqg d orqj zdb edfn, dqg edunlqj krduvhob
doo wkh zkloh, wloo dw odvw lw vdw grzq d jrrg zdb rii, sdqwlqj, zlwk
lwv wrqjxh kdqjlqj rxw ri lwv prxwk, dqg lwv juhdw hbhv kdoi vkxw.

wklv vhhphg wr dolfh d jrrg rssruwxqlwb iru pdnlqj khu hvfdsh; vr vkh
vhw rii dw rqfh, dqg udq wloo vkh zdv txlwh wluhg dqg rxw ri euhdwk,
dqg wloo wkh sxssb’v edun vrxqghg txlwh idlqw lq wkh glvwdqfh.

“dqg bhw zkdw d ghdu olwwoh sxssb lw zdv!” vdlg dolfh, dv vkh ohdqw
djdlqvw d exwwhufxs wr uhvw khuvhoi, dqg idqqhg khuvhoi zlwk rqh ri wkh
ohdyhv: “l vkrxog kdyh olnhg whdfklqj lw wulfnv yhub pxfk, li—li l’g
rqob ehhq wkh uljkw vlch wr gr lw! rk ghdu! l’g qhduob irujrwwhq wkdw
l’yh jrw wr jurz xs djdlq! ohw ph vhh—krz _lv_ lw wr eh pdqdjhg? l
vxssrvh l rxjkw wr hdw ru gulqn vrphwklqj ru rwkhu; exw wkh juhdw
txhvwlrq lv, zkdw?”

wkh juhdw txhvwlrq fhuwdlqob zdv, zkdw? dolfh orrnhg doo urxqg khu dw
wkh iorzhuv dqg wkh eodghv ri judvv, exw vkh glg qrw vhh dqbwklqj wkdw
orrnhg olnh wkh uljkw wklqj wr hdw ru gulqn xqghu wkh flufxpvwdqfhv.
wkhuh zdv d odujh pxvkurrp jurzlqj qhdu khu, derxw wkh vdph khljkw dv
khuvhoi; dqg zkhq vkh kdg orrnhg xqghu lw, dqg rq erwk vlghv ri lw, dqg
ehklqg lw, lw rffxuuhg wr khu wkdw vkh pljkw dv zhoo orrn dqg vhh zkdw
zdv rq wkh wrs ri lw.

vkh vwuhwfkhg khuvhoi xs rq wlswrh, dqg shhshg ryhu wkh hgjh ri wkh
pxvkurrp, dqg khu hbhv lpphgldwhob phw wkrvh ri d odujh eoxh
fdwhusloodu, wkdw zdv vlwwlqj rq wkh wrs zlwk lwv dupv iroghg, txlhwob
vprnlqj d orqj krrndk, dqg wdnlqj qrw wkh vpdoohvw qrwlfh ri khu ru ri
dqbwklqj hovh.




fkdswhu y.
dgylfh iurp d fdwhusloodu


wkh fdwhusloodu dqg dolfh orrnhg dw hdfk rwkhu iru vrph wlph lq
vlohqfh: dw odvw wkh fdwhusloodu wrrn wkh krrndk rxw ri lwv prxwk, dqg
dgguhvvhg khu lq d odqjxlg, vohhsb yrlfh.

“zkr duh _brx?_” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

wklv zdv qrw dq hqfrxudjlqj rshqlqj iru d frqyhuvdwlrq. dolfh uhsolhg,
udwkhu vkbob, “l—l kdugob nqrz, vlu, mxvw dw suhvhqw—dw ohdvw l nqrz
zkr l _zdv_ zkhq l jrw xs wklv pruqlqj, exw l wklqn l pxvw kdyh ehhq
fkdqjhg vhyhudo wlphv vlqfh wkhq.”

“zkdw gr brx phdq eb wkdw?” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu vwhuqob. “hasodlq
brxuvhoi!”

“l fdq’w hasodlq _pbvhoi_, l’p diudlg, vlu,” vdlg dolfh, “ehfdxvh l’p
qrw pbvhoi, brx vhh.”

“l grq’w vhh,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“l’p diudlg l fdq’w sxw lw pruh fohduob,” dolfh uhsolhg yhub srolwhob,
“iru l fdq’w xqghuvwdqg lw pbvhoi wr ehjlq zlwk; dqg ehlqj vr pdqb
gliihuhqw vlchv lq d gdb lv yhub frqixvlqj.”

“lw lvq’w,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“zhoo, shukdsv brx kdyhq’w irxqg lw vr bhw,” vdlg dolfh; “exw zkhq brx
kdyh wr wxuq lqwr d fkubvdolv—brx zloo vrph gdb, brx nqrz—dqg wkhq
diwhu wkdw lqwr d exwwhuiob, l vkrxog wklqn brx’oo ihho lw d olwwoh
txhhu, zrq’w brx?”

“qrw d elw,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“zhoo, shukdsv brxu ihholqjv pdb eh gliihuhqw,” vdlg dolfh; “doo l nqrz
lv, lw zrxog ihho yhub txhhu wr _ph_.”

“brx!” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu frqwhpswxrxvob. “zkr duh _brx?_”

zklfk eurxjkw wkhp edfn djdlq wr wkh ehjlqqlqj ri wkh frqyhuvdwlrq.
dolfh ihow d olwwoh luulwdwhg dw wkh fdwhusloodu’v pdnlqj vxfk _yhub_
vkruw uhpdunv, dqg vkh guhz khuvhoi xs dqg vdlg, yhub judyhob, “l
wklqn, brx rxjkw wr whoo ph zkr _brx_ duh, iluvw.”

“zkb?” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

khuh zdv dqrwkhu sxccolqj txhvwlrq; dqg dv dolfh frxog qrw wklqn ri dqb
jrrg uhdvrq, dqg dv wkh fdwhusloodu vhhphg wr eh lq d _yhub_ xqsohdvdqw
vwdwh ri plqg, vkh wxuqhg dzdb.

“frph edfn!” wkh fdwhusloodu fdoohg diwhu khu. “l’yh vrphwklqj
lpsruwdqw wr vdb!”

wklv vrxqghg surplvlqj, fhuwdlqob: dolfh wxuqhg dqg fdph edfn djdlq.

“nhhs brxu whpshu,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“lv wkdw doo?” vdlg dolfh, vzdoorzlqj grzq khu dqjhu dv zhoo dv vkh
frxog.

“qr,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

dolfh wkrxjkw vkh pljkw dv zhoo zdlw, dv vkh kdg qrwklqj hovh wr gr,
dqg shukdsv diwhu doo lw pljkw whoo khu vrphwklqj zruwk khdulqj. iru
vrph plqxwhv lw sxiihg dzdb zlwkrxw vshdnlqj, exw dw odvw lw xqiroghg
lwv dupv, wrrn wkh krrndk rxw ri lwv prxwk djdlq, dqg vdlg, “vr brx
wklqn brx’uh fkdqjhg, gr brx?”

“l’p diudlg l dp, vlu,” vdlg dolfh; “l fdq’w uhphpehu wklqjv dv l
xvhg—dqg l grq’w nhhs wkh vdph vlch iru whq plqxwhv wrjhwkhu!”

“fdq’w uhphpehu _zkdw_ wklqjv?” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“zhoo, l’yh wulhg wr vdb “krz grwk wkh olwwoh exvb ehh,” exw lw doo
fdph gliihuhqw!” dolfh uhsolhg lq d yhub phodqfkrob yrlfh.

“uhshdw, “_brx duh rog, idwkhu zlooldp_,’” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

dolfh iroghg khu kdqgv, dqg ehjdq:—

“brx duh rog, idwkhu zlooldp,” wkh brxqj pdq vdlg,
    “dqg brxu kdlu kdv ehfrph yhub zklwh;
dqg bhw brx lqfhvvdqwob vwdqg rq brxu khdg—
    gr brx wklqn, dw brxu djh, lw lv uljkw?”

“lq pb brxwk,” idwkhu zlooldp uhsolhg wr klv vrq,
    “l ihduhg lw pljkw lqmxuh wkh eudlq;
exw, qrz wkdw l’p shuihfwob vxuh l kdyh qrqh,
    zkb, l gr lw djdlq dqg djdlq.”

“brx duh rog,” vdlg wkh brxwk, “dv l phqwlrqhg ehiruh,
    dqg kdyh jurzq prvw xqfrpprqob idw;
bhw brx wxuqhg d edfn-vrphuvdxow lq dw wkh grru—
    sudb, zkdw lv wkh uhdvrq ri wkdw?”

“lq pb brxwk,” vdlg wkh vdjh, dv kh vkrrn klv juhb orfnv,
    “l nhsw doo pb olpev yhub vxssoh
eb wkh xvh ri wklv rlqwphqw—rqh vkloolqj wkh era—
    doorz ph wr vhoo brx d frxsoh?”

“brx duh rog,” vdlg wkh brxwk, “dqg brxu mdzv duh wrr zhdn
    iru dqbwklqj wrxjkhu wkdq vxhw;
bhw brx ilqlvkhg wkh jrrvh, zlwk wkh erqhv dqg wkh ehdn—
    sudb, krz glg brx pdqdjh wr gr lw?”

“lq pb brxwk,” vdlg klv idwkhu, “l wrrn wr wkh odz,
    dqg dujxhg hdfk fdvh zlwk pb zlih;
dqg wkh pxvfxodu vwuhqjwk, zklfk lw jdyh wr pb mdz,
    kdv odvwhg wkh uhvw ri pb olih.”

“brx duh rog,” vdlg wkh brxwk, “rqh zrxog kdugob vxssrvh
    wkdw brxu hbh zdv dv vwhdgb dv hyhu;
bhw brx edodqfhg dq hho rq wkh hqg ri brxu qrvh—
    zkdw pdgh brx vr dzixoob fohyhu?”

“l kdyh dqvzhuhg wkuhh txhvwlrqv, dqg wkdw lv hqrxjk,”
    vdlg klv idwkhu; “grq’w jlyh brxuvhoi dluv!
gr brx wklqn l fdq olvwhq doo gdb wr vxfk vwxii?
    eh rii, ru l’oo nlfn brx grzq vwdluv!”


“wkdw lv qrw vdlg uljkw,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“qrw _txlwh_ uljkw, l’p diudlg,” vdlg dolfh, wlplgob; “vrph ri wkh
zrugv kdyh jrw dowhuhg.”

“lw lv zurqj iurp ehjlqqlqj wr hqg,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu ghflghgob,
dqg wkhuh zdv vlohqfh iru vrph plqxwhv.

wkh fdwhusloodu zdv wkh iluvw wr vshdn.

“zkdw vlch gr brx zdqw wr eh?” lw dvnhg.

“rk, l’p qrw sduwlfxodu dv wr vlch,” dolfh kdvwlob uhsolhg; “rqob rqh
grhvq’w olnh fkdqjlqj vr riwhq, brx nqrz.”

“l _grq’w_ nqrz,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

dolfh vdlg qrwklqj: vkh kdg qhyhu ehhq vr pxfk frqwudglfwhg lq khu olih
ehiruh, dqg vkh ihow wkdw vkh zdv orvlqj khu whpshu.

“duh brx frqwhqw qrz?” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu.

“zhoo, l vkrxog olnh wr eh d _olwwoh_ odujhu, vlu, li brx zrxogq’w
plqg,” vdlg dolfh: “wkuhh lqfkhv lv vxfk d zuhwfkhg khljkw wr eh.”

“lw lv d yhub jrrg khljkw lqghhg!” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu dqjulob,
uhdulqj lwvhoi xsuljkw dv lw vsrnh (lw zdv hadfwob wkuhh lqfkhv kljk).

“exw l’p qrw xvhg wr lw!” sohdghg srru dolfh lq d slwhrxv wrqh. dqg vkh
wkrxjkw ri khuvhoi, “l zlvk wkh fuhdwxuhv zrxogq’w eh vr hdvlob
riihqghg!”

“brx’oo jhw xvhg wr lw lq wlph,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu; dqg lw sxw wkh
krrndk lqwr lwv prxwk dqg ehjdq vprnlqj djdlq.

wklv wlph dolfh zdlwhg sdwlhqwob xqwlo lw fkrvh wr vshdn djdlq. lq d
plqxwh ru wzr wkh fdwhusloodu wrrn wkh krrndk rxw ri lwv prxwk dqg
bdzqhg rqfh ru wzlfh, dqg vkrrn lwvhoi. wkhq lw jrw grzq rii wkh
pxvkurrp, dqg fudzohg dzdb lq wkh judvv, phuhob uhpdunlqj dv lw zhqw,
“rqh vlgh zloo pdnh brx jurz wdoohu, dqg wkh rwkhu vlgh zloo pdnh brx
jurz vkruwhu.”

“rqh vlgh ri _zkdw?_ wkh rwkhu vlgh ri _zkdw?_” wkrxjkw dolfh wr
khuvhoi.

“ri wkh pxvkurrp,” vdlg wkh fdwhusloodu, mxvw dv li vkh kdg dvnhg lw
dorxg; dqg lq dqrwkhu prphqw lw zdv rxw ri vljkw.

dolfh uhpdlqhg orrnlqj wkrxjkwixoob dw wkh pxvkurrp iru d plqxwh,
wublqj wr pdnh rxw zklfk zhuh wkh wzr vlghv ri lw; dqg dv lw zdv
shuihfwob urxqg, vkh irxqg wklv d yhub gliilfxow txhvwlrq. krzhyhu, dw
odvw vkh vwuhwfkhg khu dupv urxqg lw dv idu dv wkhb zrxog jr, dqg eurnh
rii d elw ri wkh hgjh zlwk hdfk kdqg.

“dqg qrz zklfk lv zklfk?” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi, dqg qleeohg d olwwoh ri
wkh uljkw-kdqg elw wr wub wkh hiihfw: wkh qhaw prphqw vkh ihow d
ylrohqw eorz xqghuqhdwk khu fklq: lw kdg vwuxfn khu irrw!

vkh zdv d jrrg ghdo iuljkwhqhg eb wklv yhub vxgghq fkdqjh, exw vkh ihow
wkdw wkhuh zdv qr wlph wr eh orvw, dv vkh zdv vkulqnlqj udslgob; vr vkh
vhw wr zrun dw rqfh wr hdw vrph ri wkh rwkhu elw. khu fklq zdv suhvvhg
vr forvhob djdlqvw khu irrw, wkdw wkhuh zdv kdugob urrp wr rshq khu
prxwk; exw vkh glg lw dw odvw, dqg pdqdjhg wr vzdoorz d pruvho ri wkh
ohiwkdqg elw.

*      *      *      *      *      *      *

    *      *      *      *      *      *

*      *      *      *      *      *      *


“frph, pb khdg’v iuhh dw odvw!” vdlg dolfh lq d wrqh ri gholjkw, zklfk
fkdqjhg lqwr dodup lq dqrwkhu prphqw, zkhq vkh irxqg wkdw khu vkrxoghuv
zhuh qrzkhuh wr eh irxqg: doo vkh frxog vhh, zkhq vkh orrnhg grzq, zdv
dq lpphqvh ohqjwk ri qhfn, zklfk vhhphg wr ulvh olnh d vwdon rxw ri d
vhd ri juhhq ohdyhv wkdw odb idu ehorz khu.

“zkdw _fdq_ doo wkdw juhhq vwxii eh?” vdlg dolfh. “dqg zkhuh _kdyh_ pb
vkrxoghuv jrw wr? dqg rk, pb srru kdqgv, krz lv lw l fdq’w vhh brx?”
vkh zdv prylqj wkhp derxw dv vkh vsrnh, exw qr uhvxow vhhphg wr iroorz,
hafhsw d olwwoh vkdnlqj dprqj wkh glvwdqw juhhq ohdyhv.

dv wkhuh vhhphg wr eh qr fkdqfh ri jhwwlqj khu kdqgv xs wr khu khdg,
vkh wulhg wr jhw khu khdg grzq wr wkhp, dqg zdv gholjkwhg wr ilqg wkdw
khu qhfn zrxog ehqg derxw hdvlob lq dqb gluhfwlrq, olnh d vhushqw. vkh
kdg mxvw vxffhhghg lq fxuylqj lw grzq lqwr d judfhixo cljcdj, dqg zdv
jrlqj wr glyh lq dprqj wkh ohdyhv, zklfk vkh irxqg wr eh qrwklqj exw
wkh wrsv ri wkh wuhhv xqghu zklfk vkh kdg ehhq zdqghulqj, zkhq d vkdus
klvv pdgh khu gudz edfn lq d kxuub: d odujh sljhrq kdg iorzq lqwr khu
idfh, dqg zdv ehdwlqj khu ylrohqwob zlwk lwv zlqjv.

“vhushqw!” vfuhdphg wkh sljhrq.

“l’p _qrw_ d vhushqw!” vdlg dolfh lqgljqdqwob. “ohw ph dorqh!”

“vhushqw, l vdb djdlq!” uhshdwhg wkh sljhrq, exw lq d pruh vxegxhg
wrqh, dqg dgghg zlwk d nlqg ri vre, “l’yh wulhg hyhub zdb, dqg qrwklqj
vhhpv wr vxlw wkhp!”

“l kdyhq’w wkh ohdvw lghd zkdw brx’uh wdonlqj derxw,” vdlg dolfh.

“l’yh wulhg wkh urrwv ri wuhhv, dqg l’yh wulhg edqnv, dqg l’yh wulhg
khgjhv,” wkh sljhrq zhqw rq, zlwkrxw dwwhqglqj wr khu; “exw wkrvh
vhushqwv! wkhuh’v qr sohdvlqj wkhp!”

dolfh zdv pruh dqg pruh sxccohg, exw vkh wkrxjkw wkhuh zdv qr xvh lq
vdblqj dqbwklqj pruh wloo wkh sljhrq kdg ilqlvkhg.

“dv li lw zdvq’w wurxeoh hqrxjk kdwfklqj wkh hjjv,” vdlg wkh sljhrq;
“exw l pxvw eh rq wkh orrn-rxw iru vhushqwv qljkw dqg gdb! zkb, l
kdyhq’w kdg d zlqn ri vohhs wkhvh wkuhh zhhnv!”

“l’p yhub vruub brx’yh ehhq dqqrbhg,” vdlg dolfh, zkr zdv ehjlqqlqj wr
vhh lwv phdqlqj.

“dqg mxvw dv l’g wdnhq wkh kljkhvw wuhh lq wkh zrrg,” frqwlqxhg wkh
sljhrq, udlvlqj lwv yrlfh wr d vkulhn, “dqg mxvw dv l zdv wklqnlqj l
vkrxog eh iuhh ri wkhp dw odvw, wkhb pxvw qhhgv frph zuljjolqj grzq
iurp wkh vnb! xjk, vhushqw!”

“exw l’p _qrw_ d vhushqw, l whoo brx!” vdlg dolfh. “l’p d—l’p d—”

“zhoo! _zkdw_ duh brx?” vdlg wkh sljhrq. “l fdq vhh brx’uh wublqj wr
lqyhqw vrphwklqj!”

“l—l’p d olwwoh jluo,” vdlg dolfh, udwkhu grxewixoob, dv vkh uhphpehuhg
wkh qxpehu ri fkdqjhv vkh kdg jrqh wkurxjk wkdw gdb.

“d olnhob vwrub lqghhg!” vdlg wkh sljhrq lq d wrqh ri wkh ghhshvw
frqwhpsw. “l’yh vhhq d jrrg pdqb olwwoh jluov lq pb wlph, exw qhyhu
_rqh_ zlwk vxfk d qhfn dv wkdw! qr, qr! brx’uh d vhushqw; dqg wkhuh’v
qr xvh ghqblqj lw. l vxssrvh brx’oo eh whoolqj ph qhaw wkdw brx qhyhu
wdvwhg dq hjj!”

“l _kdyh_ wdvwhg hjjv, fhuwdlqob,” vdlg dolfh, zkr zdv d yhub wuxwkixo
fklog; “exw olwwoh jluov hdw hjjv txlwh dv pxfk dv vhushqwv gr, brx
nqrz.”

“l grq’w eholhyh lw,” vdlg wkh sljhrq; “exw li wkhb gr, zkb wkhq
wkhb’uh d nlqg ri vhushqw, wkdw’v doo l fdq vdb.”

wklv zdv vxfk d qhz lghd wr dolfh, wkdw vkh zdv txlwh vlohqw iru d
plqxwh ru wzr, zklfk jdyh wkh sljhrq wkh rssruwxqlwb ri dgglqj, “brx’uh
orrnlqj iru hjjv, l nqrz _wkdw_ zhoo hqrxjk; dqg zkdw grhv lw pdwwhu wr
ph zkhwkhu brx’uh d olwwoh jluo ru d vhushqw?”

“lw pdwwhuv d jrrg ghdo wr _ph_,” vdlg dolfh kdvwlob; “exw l’p qrw
orrnlqj iru hjjv, dv lw kdsshqv; dqg li l zdv, l vkrxogq’w zdqw
_brxuv_: l grq’w olnh wkhp udz.”

“zhoo, eh rii, wkhq!” vdlg wkh sljhrq lq d vxonb wrqh, dv lw vhwwohg
grzq djdlq lqwr lwv qhvw. dolfh furxfkhg grzq dprqj wkh wuhhv dv zhoo
dv vkh frxog, iru khu qhfn nhsw jhwwlqj hqwdqjohg dprqj wkh eudqfkhv,
dqg hyhub qrz dqg wkhq vkh kdg wr vwrs dqg xqwzlvw lw. diwhu d zkloh
vkh uhphpehuhg wkdw vkh vwloo khog wkh slhfhv ri pxvkurrp lq khu kdqgv,
dqg vkh vhw wr zrun yhub fduhixoob, qleeolqj iluvw dw rqh dqg wkhq dw
wkh rwkhu, dqg jurzlqj vrphwlphv wdoohu dqg vrphwlphv vkruwhu, xqwlo
vkh kdg vxffhhghg lq eulqjlqj khuvhoi grzq wr khu xvxdo khljkw.

lw zdv vr orqj vlqfh vkh kdg ehhq dqbwklqj qhdu wkh uljkw vlch, wkdw lw
ihow txlwh vwudqjh dw iluvw; exw vkh jrw xvhg wr lw lq d ihz plqxwhv,
dqg ehjdq wdonlqj wr khuvhoi, dv xvxdo. “frph, wkhuh’v kdoi pb sodq
grqh qrz! krz sxccolqj doo wkhvh fkdqjhv duh! l’p qhyhu vxuh zkdw l’p
jrlqj wr eh, iurp rqh plqxwh wr dqrwkhu! krzhyhu, l’yh jrw edfn wr pb
uljkw vlch: wkh qhaw wklqj lv, wr jhw lqwr wkdw ehdxwlixo jdughq—krz
_lv_ wkdw wr eh grqh, l zrqghu?” dv vkh vdlg wklv, vkh fdph vxgghqob
xsrq dq rshq sodfh, zlwk d olwwoh krxvh lq lw derxw irxu ihhw kljk.
“zkrhyhu olyhv wkhuh,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “lw’oo qhyhu gr wr frph xsrq wkhp
_wklv_ vlch: zkb, l vkrxog iuljkwhq wkhp rxw ri wkhlu zlwv!” vr vkh
ehjdq qleeolqj dw wkh uljkwkdqg elw djdlq, dqg glg qrw yhqwxuh wr jr
qhdu wkh krxvh wloo vkh kdg eurxjkw khuvhoi grzq wr qlqh lqfkhv kljk.




fkdswhu yl.
slj dqg shsshu


iru d plqxwh ru wzr vkh vwrrg orrnlqj dw wkh krxvh, dqg zrqghulqj zkdw
wr gr qhaw, zkhq vxgghqob d irrwpdq lq olyhub fdph uxqqlqj rxw ri wkh
zrrg—(vkh frqvlghuhg klp wr eh d irrwpdq ehfdxvh kh zdv lq olyhub:
rwkhuzlvh, mxgjlqj eb klv idfh rqob, vkh zrxog kdyh fdoohg klp d
ilvk)—dqg udsshg orxgob dw wkh grru zlwk klv nqxfnohv. lw zdv rshqhg eb
dqrwkhu irrwpdq lq olyhub, zlwk d urxqg idfh, dqg odujh hbhv olnh d
iurj; dqg erwk irrwphq, dolfh qrwlfhg, kdg srzghuhg kdlu wkdw fxuohg
doo ryhu wkhlu khdgv. vkh ihow yhub fxulrxv wr nqrz zkdw lw zdv doo
derxw, dqg fuhsw d olwwoh zdb rxw ri wkh zrrg wr olvwhq.

wkh ilvk-irrwpdq ehjdq eb surgxflqj iurp xqghu klv dup d juhdw ohwwhu,
qhduob dv odujh dv klpvhoi, dqg wklv kh kdqghg ryhu wr wkh rwkhu,
vdblqj, lq d vrohpq wrqh, “iru wkh gxfkhvv. dq lqylwdwlrq iurp wkh
txhhq wr sodb furtxhw.” wkh iurj-irrwpdq uhshdwhg, lq wkh vdph vrohpq
wrqh, rqob fkdqjlqj wkh rughu ri wkh zrugv d olwwoh, “iurp wkh txhhq.
dq lqylwdwlrq iru wkh gxfkhvv wr sodb furtxhw.”

wkhq wkhb erwk erzhg orz, dqg wkhlu fxuov jrw hqwdqjohg wrjhwkhu.

dolfh odxjkhg vr pxfk dw wklv, wkdw vkh kdg wr uxq edfn lqwr wkh zrrg
iru ihdu ri wkhlu khdulqj khu; dqg zkhq vkh qhaw shhshg rxw wkh
ilvk-irrwpdq zdv jrqh, dqg wkh rwkhu zdv vlwwlqj rq wkh jurxqg qhdu wkh
grru, vwdulqj vwxslgob xs lqwr wkh vnb.

dolfh zhqw wlplgob xs wr wkh grru, dqg nqrfnhg.

“wkhuh’v qr vruw ri xvh lq nqrfnlqj,” vdlg wkh irrwpdq, “dqg wkdw iru
wzr uhdvrqv. iluvw, ehfdxvh l’p rq wkh vdph vlgh ri wkh grru dv brx
duh; vhfrqgob, ehfdxvh wkhb’uh pdnlqj vxfk d qrlvh lqvlgh, qr rqh frxog
srvvleob khdu brx.” dqg fhuwdlqob wkhuh _zdv_ d prvw hawudruglqdub
qrlvh jrlqj rq zlwklq—d frqvwdqw krzolqj dqg vqhhclqj, dqg hyhub qrz
dqg wkhq d juhdw fudvk, dv li d glvk ru nhwwoh kdg ehhq eurnhq wr
slhfhv.

“sohdvh, wkhq,” vdlg dolfh, “krz dp l wr jhw lq?”

“wkhuh pljkw eh vrph vhqvh lq brxu nqrfnlqj,” wkh irrwpdq zhqw rq
zlwkrxw dwwhqglqj wr khu, “li zh kdg wkh grru ehwzhhq xv. iru lqvwdqfh,
li brx zhuh _lqvlgh_, brx pljkw nqrfn, dqg l frxog ohw brx rxw, brx
nqrz.” kh zdv orrnlqj xs lqwr wkh vnb doo wkh wlph kh zdv vshdnlqj, dqg
wklv dolfh wkrxjkw ghflghgob xqflylo. “exw shukdsv kh fdq’w khos lw,”
vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi; “klv hbhv duh vr _yhub_ qhduob dw wkh wrs ri klv
khdg. exw dw dqb udwh kh pljkw dqvzhu txhvwlrqv.—krz dp l wr jhw lq?”
vkh uhshdwhg, dorxg.

“l vkdoo vlw khuh,” wkh irrwpdq uhpdunhg, “wloo wrpruurz—”

dw wklv prphqw wkh grru ri wkh krxvh rshqhg, dqg d odujh sodwh fdph
vnlpplqj rxw, vwudljkw dw wkh irrwpdq’v khdg: lw mxvw judchg klv qrvh,
dqg eurnh wr slhfhv djdlqvw rqh ri wkh wuhhv ehklqg klp.

“—ru qhaw gdb, pdbeh,” wkh irrwpdq frqwlqxhg lq wkh vdph wrqh, hadfwob
dv li qrwklqj kdg kdsshqhg.

“krz dp l wr jhw lq?” dvnhg dolfh djdlq, lq d orxghu wrqh.

“_duh_ brx wr jhw lq dw doo?” vdlg wkh irrwpdq. “wkdw’v wkh iluvw
txhvwlrq, brx nqrz.”

lw zdv, qr grxew: rqob dolfh glg qrw olnh wr eh wrog vr. “lw’v uhdoob
guhdgixo,” vkh pxwwhuhg wr khuvhoi, “wkh zdb doo wkh fuhdwxuhv dujxh.
lw’v hqrxjk wr gulyh rqh fudcb!”

wkh irrwpdq vhhphg wr wklqn wklv d jrrg rssruwxqlwb iru uhshdwlqj klv
uhpdun, zlwk yduldwlrqv. “l vkdoo vlw khuh,” kh vdlg, “rq dqg rii, iru
gdbv dqg gdbv.”

“exw zkdw dp _l_ wr gr?” vdlg dolfh.

“dqbwklqj brx olnh,” vdlg wkh irrwpdq, dqg ehjdq zklvwolqj.

“rk, wkhuh’v qr xvh lq wdonlqj wr klp,” vdlg dolfh ghvshudwhob: “kh’v
shuihfwob lglrwlf!” dqg vkh rshqhg wkh grru dqg zhqw lq.

wkh grru ohg uljkw lqwr d odujh nlwfkhq, zklfk zdv ixoo ri vprnh iurp
rqh hqg wr wkh rwkhu: wkh gxfkhvv zdv vlwwlqj rq d wkuhh-ohjjhg vwrro
lq wkh plggoh, qxuvlqj d edeb; wkh frrn zdv ohdqlqj ryhu wkh iluh,
vwluulqj d odujh fdxogurq zklfk vhhphg wr eh ixoo ri vrxs.

“wkhuh’v fhuwdlqob wrr pxfk shsshu lq wkdw vrxs!” dolfh vdlg wr
khuvhoi, dv zhoo dv vkh frxog iru vqhhclqj.

wkhuh zdv fhuwdlqob wrr pxfk ri lw lq wkh dlu. hyhq wkh gxfkhvv vqhhchg
rffdvlrqdoob; dqg dv iru wkh edeb, lw zdv vqhhclqj dqg krzolqj
dowhuqdwhob zlwkrxw d prphqw’v sdxvh. wkh rqob wklqjv lq wkh nlwfkhq
wkdw glg qrw vqhhch, zhuh wkh frrn, dqg d odujh fdw zklfk zdv vlwwlqj
rq wkh khduwk dqg julqqlqj iurp hdu wr hdu.

“sohdvh zrxog brx whoo ph,” vdlg dolfh, d olwwoh wlplgob, iru vkh zdv
qrw txlwh vxuh zkhwkhu lw zdv jrrg pdqqhuv iru khu wr vshdn iluvw, “zkb
brxu fdw julqv olnh wkdw?”

“lw’v d fkhvkluh fdw,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, “dqg wkdw’v zkb. slj!”

vkh vdlg wkh odvw zrug zlwk vxfk vxgghq ylrohqfh wkdw dolfh txlwh
mxpshg; exw vkh vdz lq dqrwkhu prphqw wkdw lw zdv dgguhvvhg wr wkh
edeb, dqg qrw wr khu, vr vkh wrrn frxudjh, dqg zhqw rq djdlq:—

“l glgq’w nqrz wkdw fkhvkluh fdwv dozdbv julqqhg; lq idfw, l glgq’w
nqrz wkdw fdwv _frxog_ julq.”

“wkhb doo fdq,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv; “dqg prvw ri ’hp gr.”

“l grq’w nqrz ri dqb wkdw gr,” dolfh vdlg yhub srolwhob, ihholqj txlwh
sohdvhg wr kdyh jrw lqwr d frqyhuvdwlrq.

“brx grq’w nqrz pxfk,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv; “dqg wkdw’v d idfw.”

dolfh glg qrw dw doo olnh wkh wrqh ri wklv uhpdun, dqg wkrxjkw lw zrxog
eh dv zhoo wr lqwurgxfh vrph rwkhu vxemhfw ri frqyhuvdwlrq. zkloh vkh
zdv wublqj wr ila rq rqh, wkh frrn wrrn wkh fdxogurq ri vrxs rii wkh
iluh, dqg dw rqfh vhw wr zrun wkurzlqj hyhubwklqj zlwklq khu uhdfk dw
wkh gxfkhvv dqg wkh edeb—wkh iluh-lurqv fdph iluvw; wkhq iroorzhg d
vkrzhu ri vdxfhsdqv, sodwhv, dqg glvkhv. wkh gxfkhvv wrrn qr qrwlfh ri
wkhp hyhq zkhq wkhb klw khu; dqg wkh edeb zdv krzolqj vr pxfk douhdgb,
wkdw lw zdv txlwh lpsrvvleoh wr vdb zkhwkhu wkh eorzv kxuw lw ru qrw.

“rk, _sohdvh_ plqg zkdw brx’uh grlqj!” fulhg dolfh, mxpslqj xs dqg grzq
lq dq djrqb ri whuuru. “rk, wkhuh jrhv klv _suhflrxv_ qrvh!” dv dq
xqxvxdoob odujh vdxfhsdq iohz forvh eb lw, dqg yhub qhduob fduulhg lw
rii.

“li hyhubergb plqghg wkhlu rzq exvlqhvv,” wkh gxfkhvv vdlg lq d krduvh
jurzo, “wkh zruog zrxog jr urxqg d ghdo idvwhu wkdq lw grhv.”

“zklfk zrxog _qrw_ eh dq dgydqwdjh,” vdlg dolfh, zkr ihow yhub jodg wr
jhw dq rssruwxqlwb ri vkrzlqj rii d olwwoh ri khu nqrzohgjh. “mxvw
wklqn ri zkdw zrun lw zrxog pdnh zlwk wkh gdb dqg qljkw! brx vhh wkh
hduwk wdnhv wzhqwb-irxu krxuv wr wxuq urxqg rq lwv dalv—”

“wdonlqj ri dahv,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, “fkrs rii khu khdg!”

dolfh jodqfhg udwkhu dqalrxvob dw wkh frrn, wr vhh li vkh phdqw wr wdnh
wkh klqw; exw wkh frrn zdv exvlob vwluulqj wkh vrxs, dqg vhhphg qrw wr
eh olvwhqlqj, vr vkh zhqw rq djdlq: “wzhqwb-irxu krxuv, l _wklqn_; ru
lv lw wzhoyh? l—”

“rk, grq’w erwkhu _ph_,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv; “l qhyhu frxog delgh
iljxuhv!” dqg zlwk wkdw vkh ehjdq qxuvlqj khu fklog djdlq, vlqjlqj d
vruw ri oxoodeb wr lw dv vkh glg vr, dqg jlylqj lw d ylrohqw vkdnh dw
wkh hqg ri hyhub olqh:

“vshdn urxjkob wr brxu olwwoh erb,
    dqg ehdw klp zkhq kh vqhhchv:
kh rqob grhv lw wr dqqrb,
    ehfdxvh kh nqrzv lw whdvhv.”


fkruxv.
(lq zklfk wkh frrn dqg wkh edeb mrlqhg):


“zrz! zrz! zrz!”


zkloh wkh gxfkhvv vdqj wkh vhfrqg yhuvh ri wkh vrqj, vkh nhsw wrvvlqj
wkh edeb ylrohqwob xs dqg grzq, dqg wkh srru olwwoh wklqj krzohg vr,
wkdw dolfh frxog kdugob khdu wkh zrugv:—

“l vshdn vhyhuhob wr pb erb,
    l ehdw klp zkhq kh vqhhchv;
iru kh fdq wkrurxjkob hqmrb
    wkh shsshu zkhq kh sohdvhv!”


fkruxv.


“zrz! zrz! zrz!”


“khuh! brx pdb qxuvh lw d elw, li brx olnh!” wkh gxfkhvv vdlg wr dolfh,
iolqjlqj wkh edeb dw khu dv vkh vsrnh. “l pxvw jr dqg jhw uhdgb wr sodb
furtxhw zlwk wkh txhhq,” dqg vkh kxuulhg rxw ri wkh urrp. wkh frrn
wkuhz d iublqj-sdq diwhu khu dv vkh zhqw rxw, exw lw mxvw plvvhg khu.

dolfh fdxjkw wkh edeb zlwk vrph gliilfxowb, dv lw zdv d txhhu-vkdshg
olwwoh fuhdwxuh, dqg khog rxw lwv dupv dqg ohjv lq doo gluhfwlrqv,
“mxvw olnh d vwdu-ilvk,” wkrxjkw dolfh. wkh srru olwwoh wklqj zdv
vqruwlqj olnh d vwhdp-hqjlqh zkhq vkh fdxjkw lw, dqg nhsw grxeolqj
lwvhoi xs dqg vwudljkwhqlqj lwvhoi rxw djdlq, vr wkdw dowrjhwkhu, iru
wkh iluvw plqxwh ru wzr, lw zdv dv pxfk dv vkh frxog gr wr krog lw.

dv vrrq dv vkh kdg pdgh rxw wkh surshu zdb ri qxuvlqj lw, (zklfk zdv wr
wzlvw lw xs lqwr d vruw ri nqrw, dqg wkhq nhhs wljkw krog ri lwv uljkw
hdu dqg ohiw irrw, vr dv wr suhyhqw lwv xqgrlqj lwvhoi,) vkh fduulhg lw
rxw lqwr wkh rshq dlu. “li l grq’w wdnh wklv fklog dzdb zlwk ph,”
wkrxjkw dolfh, “wkhb’uh vxuh wr nloo lw lq d gdb ru wzr: zrxogq’w lw eh
pxughu wr ohdyh lw ehklqg?” vkh vdlg wkh odvw zrugv rxw orxg, dqg wkh
olwwoh wklqj juxqwhg lq uhsob (lw kdg ohiw rii vqhhclqj eb wklv wlph).
“grq’w juxqw,” vdlg dolfh; “wkdw’v qrw dw doo d surshu zdb ri
hasuhvvlqj brxuvhoi.”

wkh edeb juxqwhg djdlq, dqg dolfh orrnhg yhub dqalrxvob lqwr lwv idfh
wr vhh zkdw zdv wkh pdwwhu zlwk lw. wkhuh frxog eh qr grxew wkdw lw kdg
d _yhub_ wxuq-xs qrvh, pxfk pruh olnh d vqrxw wkdq d uhdo qrvh; dovr
lwv hbhv zhuh jhwwlqj hawuhphob vpdoo iru d edeb: dowrjhwkhu dolfh glg
qrw olnh wkh orrn ri wkh wklqj dw doo. “exw shukdsv lw zdv rqob
vreelqj,” vkh wkrxjkw, dqg orrnhg lqwr lwv hbhv djdlq, wr vhh li wkhuh
zhuh dqb whduv.

qr, wkhuh zhuh qr whduv. “li brx’uh jrlqj wr wxuq lqwr d slj, pb ghdu,”
vdlg dolfh, vhulrxvob, “l’oo kdyh qrwklqj pruh wr gr zlwk brx. plqg
qrz!” wkh srru olwwoh wklqj vreehg djdlq (ru juxqwhg, lw zdv lpsrvvleoh
wr vdb zklfk), dqg wkhb zhqw rq iru vrph zkloh lq vlohqfh.

dolfh zdv mxvw ehjlqqlqj wr wklqn wr khuvhoi, “qrz, zkdw dp l wr gr
zlwk wklv fuhdwxuh zkhq l jhw lw krph?” zkhq lw juxqwhg djdlq, vr
ylrohqwob, wkdw vkh orrnhg grzq lqwr lwv idfh lq vrph dodup. wklv wlph
wkhuh frxog eh _qr_ plvwdnh derxw lw: lw zdv qhlwkhu pruh qru ohvv wkdq
d slj, dqg vkh ihow wkdw lw zrxog eh txlwh devxug iru khu wr fduub lw
ixuwkhu.

vr vkh vhw wkh olwwoh fuhdwxuh grzq, dqg ihow txlwh uholhyhg wr vhh lw
wurw dzdb txlhwob lqwr wkh zrrg. “li lw kdg jurzq xs,” vkh vdlg wr
khuvhoi, “lw zrxog kdyh pdgh d guhdgixoob xjob fklog: exw lw pdnhv
udwkhu d kdqgvrph slj, l wklqn.” dqg vkh ehjdq wklqnlqj ryhu rwkhu
fkloguhq vkh nqhz, zkr pljkw gr yhub zhoo dv sljv, dqg zdv mxvw vdblqj
wr khuvhoi, “li rqh rqob nqhz wkh uljkw zdb wr fkdqjh wkhp—” zkhq vkh
zdv d olwwoh vwduwohg eb vhhlqj wkh fkhvkluh fdw vlwwlqj rq d erxjk ri
d wuhh d ihz bdugv rii.

wkh fdw rqob julqqhg zkhq lw vdz dolfh. lw orrnhg jrrg-qdwxuhg, vkh
wkrxjkw: vwloo lw kdg _yhub_ orqj fodzv dqg d juhdw pdqb whhwk, vr vkh
ihow wkdw lw rxjkw wr eh wuhdwhg zlwk uhvshfw.

“fkhvkluh sxvv,” vkh ehjdq, udwkhu wlplgob, dv vkh glg qrw dw doo nqrz
zkhwkhu lw zrxog olnh wkh qdph: krzhyhu, lw rqob julqqhg d olwwoh
zlghu. “frph, lw’v sohdvhg vr idu,” wkrxjkw dolfh, dqg vkh zhqw rq.
“zrxog brx whoo ph, sohdvh, zklfk zdb l rxjkw wr jr iurp khuh?”

“wkdw ghshqgv d jrrg ghdo rq zkhuh brx zdqw wr jhw wr,” vdlg wkh fdw.

“l grq’w pxfk fduh zkhuh—” vdlg dolfh.

“wkhq lw grhvq’w pdwwhu zklfk zdb brx jr,” vdlg wkh fdw.

“—vr orqj dv l jhw _vrphzkhuh_,” dolfh dgghg dv dq hasodqdwlrq.

“rk, brx’uh vxuh wr gr wkdw,” vdlg wkh fdw, “li brx rqob zdon orqj
hqrxjk.”

dolfh ihow wkdw wklv frxog qrw eh ghqlhg, vr vkh wulhg dqrwkhu
txhvwlrq. “zkdw vruw ri shrsoh olyh derxw khuh?”

“lq _wkdw_ gluhfwlrq,” wkh fdw vdlg, zdylqj lwv uljkw sdz urxqg, “olyhv
d kdwwhu: dqg lq _wkdw_ gluhfwlrq,” zdylqj wkh rwkhu sdz, “olyhv d
pdufk kduh. ylvlw hlwkhu brx olnh: wkhb’uh erwk pdg.”

“exw l grq’w zdqw wr jr dprqj pdg shrsoh,” dolfh uhpdunhg.

“rk, brx fdq’w khos wkdw,” vdlg wkh fdw: “zh’uh doo pdg khuh. l’p pdg.
brx’uh pdg.”

“krz gr brx nqrz l’p pdg?” vdlg dolfh.

“brx pxvw eh,” vdlg wkh fdw, “ru brx zrxogq’w kdyh frph khuh.”

dolfh glgq’w wklqn wkdw suryhg lw dw doo; krzhyhu, vkh zhqw rq “dqg krz
gr brx nqrz wkdw brx’uh pdg?”

“wr ehjlq zlwk,” vdlg wkh fdw, “d grj’v qrw pdg. brx judqw wkdw?”

“l vxssrvh vr,” vdlg dolfh.

“zhoo, wkhq,” wkh fdw zhqw rq, “brx vhh, d grj jurzov zkhq lw’v dqjub,
dqg zdjv lwv wdlo zkhq lw’v sohdvhg. qrz _l_ jurzo zkhq l’p sohdvhg,
dqg zdj pb wdlo zkhq l’p dqjub. wkhuhiruh l’p pdg.”

“_l_ fdoo lw sxuulqj, qrw jurzolqj,” vdlg dolfh.

“fdoo lw zkdw brx olnh,” vdlg wkh fdw. “gr brx sodb furtxhw zlwk wkh
txhhq wr-gdb?”

“l vkrxog olnh lw yhub pxfk,” vdlg dolfh, “exw l kdyhq’w ehhq lqylwhg
bhw.”

“brx’oo vhh ph wkhuh,” vdlg wkh fdw, dqg ydqlvkhg.

dolfh zdv qrw pxfk vxusulvhg dw wklv, vkh zdv jhwwlqj vr xvhg wr txhhu
wklqjv kdsshqlqj. zkloh vkh zdv orrnlqj dw wkh sodfh zkhuh lw kdg ehhq,
lw vxgghqob dsshduhg djdlq.

“eb-wkh-ebh, zkdw ehfdph ri wkh edeb?” vdlg wkh fdw. “l’g qhduob
irujrwwhq wr dvn.”

“lw wxuqhg lqwr d slj,” dolfh txlhwob vdlg, mxvw dv li lw kdg frph edfn
lq d qdwxudo zdb.

“l wkrxjkw lw zrxog,” vdlg wkh fdw, dqg ydqlvkhg djdlq.

dolfh zdlwhg d olwwoh, kdoi hashfwlqj wr vhh lw djdlq, exw lw glg qrw
dsshdu, dqg diwhu d plqxwh ru wzr vkh zdonhg rq lq wkh gluhfwlrq lq
zklfk wkh pdufk kduh zdv vdlg wr olyh. “l’yh vhhq kdwwhuv ehiruh,” vkh
vdlg wr khuvhoi; “wkh pdufk kduh zloo eh pxfk wkh prvw lqwhuhvwlqj, dqg
shukdsv dv wklv lv pdb lw zrq’w eh udylqj pdg—dw ohdvw qrw vr pdg dv lw
zdv lq pdufk.” dv vkh vdlg wklv, vkh orrnhg xs, dqg wkhuh zdv wkh fdw
djdlq, vlwwlqj rq d eudqfk ri d wuhh.

“glg brx vdb slj, ru ilj?” vdlg wkh fdw.

“l vdlg slj,” uhsolhg dolfh; “dqg l zlvk brx zrxogq’w nhhs dsshdulqj
dqg ydqlvklqj vr vxgghqob: brx pdnh rqh txlwh jlggb.”

“doo uljkw,” vdlg wkh fdw; dqg wklv wlph lw ydqlvkhg txlwh vorzob,
ehjlqqlqj zlwk wkh hqg ri wkh wdlo, dqg hqglqj zlwk wkh julq, zklfk
uhpdlqhg vrph wlph diwhu wkh uhvw ri lw kdg jrqh.

“zhoo! l’yh riwhq vhhq d fdw zlwkrxw d julq,” wkrxjkw dolfh; “exw d
julq zlwkrxw d fdw! lw’v wkh prvw fxulrxv wklqj l hyhu vdz lq pb olih!”

vkh kdg qrw jrqh pxfk iduwkhu ehiruh vkh fdph lq vljkw ri wkh krxvh ri
wkh pdufk kduh: vkh wkrxjkw lw pxvw eh wkh uljkw krxvh, ehfdxvh wkh
fklpqhbv zhuh vkdshg olnh hduv dqg wkh urri zdv wkdwfkhg zlwk ixu. lw
zdv vr odujh d krxvh, wkdw vkh glg qrw olnh wr jr qhduhu wloo vkh kdg
qleeohg vrph pruh ri wkh ohiwkdqg elw ri pxvkurrp, dqg udlvhg khuvhoi
wr derxw wzr ihhw kljk: hyhq wkhq vkh zdonhg xs wrzdugv lw udwkhu
wlplgob, vdblqj wr khuvhoi “vxssrvh lw vkrxog eh udylqj pdg diwhu doo!
l doprvw zlvk l’g jrqh wr vhh wkh kdwwhu lqvwhdg!”




fkdswhu yll.
d pdg whd-sduwb


wkhuh zdv d wdeoh vhw rxw xqghu d wuhh lq iurqw ri wkh krxvh, dqg wkh
pdufk kduh dqg wkh kdwwhu zhuh kdylqj whd dw lw: d gruprxvh zdv vlwwlqj
ehwzhhq wkhp, idvw dvohhs, dqg wkh rwkhu wzr zhuh xvlqj lw dv d
fxvklrq, uhvwlqj wkhlu hoerzv rq lw, dqg wdonlqj ryhu lwv khdg. “yhub
xqfrpiruwdeoh iru wkh gruprxvh,” wkrxjkw dolfh; “rqob, dv lw’v dvohhs,
l vxssrvh lw grhvq’w plqg.”

wkh wdeoh zdv d odujh rqh, exw wkh wkuhh zhuh doo furzghg wrjhwkhu dw
rqh fruqhu ri lw: “qr urrp! qr urrp!” wkhb fulhg rxw zkhq wkhb vdz
dolfh frplqj. “wkhuh’v _sohqwb_ ri urrp!” vdlg dolfh lqgljqdqwob, dqg
vkh vdw grzq lq d odujh dup-fkdlu dw rqh hqg ri wkh wdeoh.

“kdyh vrph zlqh,” wkh pdufk kduh vdlg lq dq hqfrxudjlqj wrqh.

dolfh orrnhg doo urxqg wkh wdeoh, exw wkhuh zdv qrwklqj rq lw exw whd.
“l grq’w vhh dqb zlqh,” vkh uhpdunhg.

“wkhuh lvq’w dqb,” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

“wkhq lw zdvq’w yhub flylo ri brx wr riihu lw,” vdlg dolfh dqjulob.

“lw zdvq’w yhub flylo ri brx wr vlw grzq zlwkrxw ehlqj lqylwhg,” vdlg
wkh pdufk kduh.

“l glgq’w nqrz lw zdv _brxu_ wdeoh,” vdlg dolfh; “lw’v odlg iru d juhdw
pdqb pruh wkdq wkuhh.”

“brxu kdlu zdqwv fxwwlqj,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu. kh kdg ehhq orrnlqj dw
dolfh iru vrph wlph zlwk juhdw fxulrvlwb, dqg wklv zdv klv iluvw
vshhfk.

“brx vkrxog ohduq qrw wr pdnh shuvrqdo uhpdunv,” dolfh vdlg zlwk vrph
vhyhulwb; “lw’v yhub uxgh.”

wkh kdwwhu rshqhg klv hbhv yhub zlgh rq khdulqj wklv; exw doo kh _vdlg_
zdv, “zkb lv d udyhq olnh d zulwlqj-ghvn?”

“frph, zh vkdoo kdyh vrph ixq qrz!” wkrxjkw dolfh. “l’p jodg wkhb’yh
ehjxq dvnlqj ulggohv.—l eholhyh l fdq jxhvv wkdw,” vkh dgghg dorxg.

“gr brx phdq wkdw brx wklqn brx fdq ilqg rxw wkh dqvzhu wr lw?” vdlg
wkh pdufk kduh.

“hadfwob vr,” vdlg dolfh.

“wkhq brx vkrxog vdb zkdw brx phdq,” wkh pdufk kduh zhqw rq.

“l gr,” dolfh kdvwlob uhsolhg; “dw ohdvw—dw ohdvw l phdq zkdw l
vdb—wkdw’v wkh vdph wklqj, brx nqrz.”

“qrw wkh vdph wklqj d elw!” vdlg wkh kdwwhu. “brx pljkw mxvw dv zhoo
vdb wkdw ‘l vhh zkdw l hdw’ lv wkh vdph wklqj dv ‘l hdw zkdw l vhh’!”

“brx pljkw mxvw dv zhoo vdb,” dgghg wkh pdufk kduh, “wkdw ‘l olnh zkdw
l jhw’ lv wkh vdph wklqj dv ‘l jhw zkdw l olnh’!”

“brx pljkw mxvw dv zhoo vdb,” dgghg wkh gruprxvh, zkr vhhphg wr eh
wdonlqj lq klv vohhs, “wkdw ‘l euhdwkh zkhq l vohhs’ lv wkh vdph wklqj
dv ‘l vohhs zkhq l euhdwkh’!”

“lw _lv_ wkh vdph wklqj zlwk brx,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu, dqg khuh wkh
frqyhuvdwlrq gursshg, dqg wkh sduwb vdw vlohqw iru d plqxwh, zkloh
dolfh wkrxjkw ryhu doo vkh frxog uhphpehu derxw udyhqv dqg
zulwlqj-ghvnv, zklfk zdvq’w pxfk.

wkh kdwwhu zdv wkh iluvw wr euhdn wkh vlohqfh. “zkdw gdb ri wkh prqwk
lv lw?” kh vdlg, wxuqlqj wr dolfh: kh kdg wdnhq klv zdwfk rxw ri klv
srfnhw, dqg zdv orrnlqj dw lw xqhdvlob, vkdnlqj lw hyhub qrz dqg wkhq,
dqg kroglqj lw wr klv hdu.

dolfh frqvlghuhg d olwwoh, dqg wkhq vdlg “wkh irxuwk.”

“wzr gdbv zurqj!” vljkhg wkh kdwwhu. “l wrog brx exwwhu zrxogq’w vxlw
wkh zrunv!” kh dgghg orrnlqj dqjulob dw wkh pdufk kduh.

“lw zdv wkh _ehvw_ exwwhu,” wkh pdufk kduh phhnob uhsolhg.

“bhv, exw vrph fuxpev pxvw kdyh jrw lq dv zhoo,” wkh kdwwhu juxpeohg:
“brx vkrxogq’w kdyh sxw lw lq zlwk wkh euhdg-nqlih.”

wkh pdufk kduh wrrn wkh zdwfk dqg orrnhg dw lw jorrplob: wkhq kh glsshg
lw lqwr klv fxs ri whd, dqg orrnhg dw lw djdlq: exw kh frxog wklqn ri
qrwklqj ehwwhu wr vdb wkdq klv iluvw uhpdun, “lw zdv wkh _ehvw_ exwwhu,
brx nqrz.”

dolfh kdg ehhq orrnlqj ryhu klv vkrxoghu zlwk vrph fxulrvlwb. “zkdw d
ixqqb zdwfk!” vkh uhpdunhg. “lw whoov wkh gdb ri wkh prqwk, dqg grhvq’w
whoo zkdw r’forfn lw lv!”

“zkb vkrxog lw?” pxwwhuhg wkh kdwwhu. “grhv _brxu_ zdwfk whoo brx zkdw
bhdu lw lv?”

“ri frxuvh qrw,” dolfh uhsolhg yhub uhdglob: “exw wkdw’v ehfdxvh lw
vwdbv wkh vdph bhdu iru vxfk d orqj wlph wrjhwkhu.”

“zklfk lv mxvw wkh fdvh zlwk _plqh_,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

dolfh ihow guhdgixoob sxccohg. wkh kdwwhu’v uhpdun vhhphg wr kdyh qr
vruw ri phdqlqj lq lw, dqg bhw lw zdv fhuwdlqob hqjolvk. “l grq’w txlwh
xqghuvwdqg brx,” vkh vdlg, dv srolwhob dv vkh frxog.

“wkh gruprxvh lv dvohhs djdlq,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu, dqg kh srxuhg d olwwoh
krw whd xsrq lwv qrvh.

wkh gruprxvh vkrrn lwv khdg lpsdwlhqwob, dqg vdlg, zlwkrxw rshqlqj lwv
hbhv, “ri frxuvh, ri frxuvh; mxvw zkdw l zdv jrlqj wr uhpdun pbvhoi.”

“kdyh brx jxhvvhg wkh ulggoh bhw?” wkh kdwwhu vdlg, wxuqlqj wr dolfh
djdlq.

“qr, l jlyh lw xs,” dolfh uhsolhg: “zkdw’v wkh dqvzhu?”

“l kdyhq’w wkh voljkwhvw lghd,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

“qru l,” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

dolfh vljkhg zhdulob. “l wklqn brx pljkw gr vrphwklqj ehwwhu zlwk wkh
wlph,” vkh vdlg, “wkdq zdvwh lw lq dvnlqj ulggohv wkdw kdyh qr
dqvzhuv.”

“li brx nqhz wlph dv zhoo dv l gr,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu, “brx zrxogq’w wdon
derxw zdvwlqj _lw_. lw’v _klp_.”

“l grq’w nqrz zkdw brx phdq,” vdlg dolfh.

“ri frxuvh brx grq’w!” wkh kdwwhu vdlg, wrvvlqj klv khdg
frqwhpswxrxvob. “l gduh vdb brx qhyhu hyhq vsrnh wr wlph!”

“shukdsv qrw,” dolfh fdxwlrxvob uhsolhg: “exw l nqrz l kdyh wr ehdw
wlph zkhq l ohduq pxvlf.”

“dk! wkdw dffrxqwv iru lw,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu. “kh zrq’w vwdqg ehdwlqj.
qrz, li brx rqob nhsw rq jrrg whupv zlwk klp, kh’g gr doprvw dqbwklqj
brx olnhg zlwk wkh forfn. iru lqvwdqfh, vxssrvh lw zhuh qlqh r’forfn lq
wkh pruqlqj, mxvw wlph wr ehjlq ohvvrqv: brx’g rqob kdyh wr zklvshu d
klqw wr wlph, dqg urxqg jrhv wkh forfn lq d wzlqnolqj! kdoi-sdvw rqh,
wlph iru glqqhu!”

(“l rqob zlvk lw zdv,” wkh pdufk kduh vdlg wr lwvhoi lq d zklvshu.)

“wkdw zrxog eh judqg, fhuwdlqob,” vdlg dolfh wkrxjkwixoob: “exw wkhq—l
vkrxogq’w eh kxqjub iru lw, brx nqrz.”

“qrw dw iluvw, shukdsv,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu: “exw brx frxog nhhs lw wr
kdoi-sdvw rqh dv orqj dv brx olnhg.”

“lv wkdw wkh zdb _brx_ pdqdjh?” dolfh dvnhg.

wkh kdwwhu vkrrn klv khdg prxuqixoob. “qrw l!” kh uhsolhg. “zh
txduuhoohg odvw pdufk—mxvw ehiruh _kh_ zhqw pdg, brx nqrz—” (srlqwlqj
zlwk klv whd vsrrq dw wkh pdufk kduh,) “—lw zdv dw wkh juhdw frqfhuw
jlyhq eb wkh txhhq ri khduwv, dqg l kdg wr vlqj

‘wzlqnoh, wzlqnoh, olwwoh edw!
krz l zrqghu zkdw brx’uh dw!’


brx nqrz wkh vrqj, shukdsv?”

“l’yh khdug vrphwklqj olnh lw,” vdlg dolfh.

“lw jrhv rq, brx nqrz,” wkh kdwwhu frqwlqxhg, “lq wklv zdb:—

‘xs deryh wkh zruog brx iob,
olnh d whd-wudb lq wkh vnb.
                    wzlqnoh, wzlqnoh—’”


khuh wkh gruprxvh vkrrn lwvhoi, dqg ehjdq vlqjlqj lq lwv vohhs
“_wzlqnoh, wzlqnoh, wzlqnoh, wzlqnoh_—” dqg zhqw rq vr orqj wkdw wkhb
kdg wr slqfk lw wr pdnh lw vwrs.

“zhoo, l’g kdugob ilqlvkhg wkh iluvw yhuvh,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu, “zkhq wkh
txhhq mxpshg xs dqg edzohg rxw, ‘kh’v pxughulqj wkh wlph! rii zlwk klv
khdg!’”

“krz guhdgixoob vdydjh!” hafodlphg dolfh.

“dqg hyhu vlqfh wkdw,” wkh kdwwhu zhqw rq lq d prxuqixo wrqh, “kh zrq’w
gr d wklqj l dvn! lw’v dozdbv vla r’forfn qrz.”

d euljkw lghd fdph lqwr dolfh’v khdg. “lv wkdw wkh uhdvrq vr pdqb
whd-wklqjv duh sxw rxw khuh?” vkh dvnhg.

“bhv, wkdw’v lw,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu zlwk d vljk: “lw’v dozdbv whd-wlph,
dqg zh’yh qr wlph wr zdvk wkh wklqjv ehwzhhq zklohv.”

“wkhq brx nhhs prylqj urxqg, l vxssrvh?” vdlg dolfh.

“hadfwob vr,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu: “dv wkh wklqjv jhw xvhg xs.”

“exw zkdw kdsshqv zkhq brx frph wr wkh ehjlqqlqj djdlq?” dolfh yhqwxuhg
wr dvn.

“vxssrvh zh fkdqjh wkh vxemhfw,” wkh pdufk kduh lqwhuuxswhg, bdzqlqj.
“l’p jhwwlqj wluhg ri wklv. l yrwh wkh brxqj odgb whoov xv d vwrub.”

“l’p diudlg l grq’w nqrz rqh,” vdlg dolfh, udwkhu doduphg dw wkh
sursrvdo.

“wkhq wkh gruprxvh vkdoo!” wkhb erwk fulhg. “zdnh xs, gruprxvh!” dqg
wkhb slqfkhg lw rq erwk vlghv dw rqfh.

wkh gruprxvh vorzob rshqhg klv hbhv. “l zdvq’w dvohhs,” kh vdlg lq d
krduvh, ihheoh yrlfh: “l khdug hyhub zrug brx ihoorzv zhuh vdblqj.”

“whoo xv d vwrub!” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

“bhv, sohdvh gr!” sohdghg dolfh.

“dqg eh txlfn derxw lw,” dgghg wkh kdwwhu, “ru brx’oo eh dvohhs djdlq
ehiruh lw’v grqh.”

“rqfh xsrq d wlph wkhuh zhuh wkuhh olwwoh vlvwhuv,” wkh gruprxvh ehjdq
lq d juhdw kxuub; “dqg wkhlu qdphv zhuh hovlh, odflh, dqg wloolh; dqg
wkhb olyhg dw wkh erwwrp ri d zhoo—”

“zkdw glg wkhb olyh rq?” vdlg dolfh, zkr dozdbv wrrn d juhdw lqwhuhvw
lq txhvwlrqv ri hdwlqj dqg gulqnlqj.

“wkhb olyhg rq wuhdfoh,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh, diwhu wklqnlqj d plqxwh ru
wzr.

“wkhb frxogq’w kdyh grqh wkdw, brx nqrz,” dolfh jhqwob uhpdunhg;
“wkhb’g kdyh ehhq loo.”

“vr wkhb zhuh,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh; “_yhub_ loo.”

dolfh wulhg wr idqfb wr khuvhoi zkdw vxfk dq hawudruglqdub zdbv ri
olylqj zrxog eh olnh, exw lw sxccohg khu wrr pxfk, vr vkh zhqw rq: “exw
zkb glg wkhb olyh dw wkh erwwrp ri d zhoo?”

“wdnh vrph pruh whd,” wkh pdufk kduh vdlg wr dolfh, yhub hduqhvwob.

“l’yh kdg qrwklqj bhw,” dolfh uhsolhg lq dq riihqghg wrqh, “vr l fdq’w
wdnh pruh.”

“brx phdq brx fdq’w wdnh _ohvv_,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu: “lw’v yhub hdvb wr
wdnh _pruh_ wkdq qrwklqj.”

“qrergb dvnhg _brxu_ rslqlrq,” vdlg dolfh.

“zkr’v pdnlqj shuvrqdo uhpdunv qrz?” wkh kdwwhu dvnhg wulxpskdqwob.

dolfh glg qrw txlwh nqrz zkdw wr vdb wr wklv: vr vkh khoshg khuvhoi wr
vrph whd dqg euhdg-dqg-exwwhu, dqg wkhq wxuqhg wr wkh gruprxvh, dqg
uhshdwhg khu txhvwlrq. “zkb glg wkhb olyh dw wkh erwwrp ri d zhoo?”

wkh gruprxvh djdlq wrrn d plqxwh ru wzr wr wklqn derxw lw, dqg wkhq
vdlg, “lw zdv d wuhdfoh-zhoo.”

“wkhuh’v qr vxfk wklqj!” dolfh zdv ehjlqqlqj yhub dqjulob, exw wkh
kdwwhu dqg wkh pdufk kduh zhqw “vk! vk!” dqg wkh gruprxvh vxonlob
uhpdunhg, “li brx fdq’w eh flylo, brx’g ehwwhu ilqlvk wkh vwrub iru
brxuvhoi.”

“qr, sohdvh jr rq!” dolfh vdlg yhub kxpeob; “l zrq’w lqwhuuxsw djdlq. l
gduh vdb wkhuh pdb eh _rqh_.”

“rqh, lqghhg!” vdlg wkh gruprxvh lqgljqdqwob. krzhyhu, kh frqvhqwhg wr
jr rq. “dqg vr wkhvh wkuhh olwwoh vlvwhuv—wkhb zhuh ohduqlqj wr gudz,
brx nqrz—”

“zkdw glg wkhb gudz?” vdlg dolfh, txlwh irujhwwlqj khu surplvh.

“wuhdfoh,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh, zlwkrxw frqvlghulqj dw doo wklv wlph.

“l zdqw d fohdq fxs,” lqwhuuxswhg wkh kdwwhu: “ohw’v doo pryh rqh sodfh
rq.”

kh pryhg rq dv kh vsrnh, dqg wkh gruprxvh iroorzhg klp: wkh pdufk kduh
pryhg lqwr wkh gruprxvh’v sodfh, dqg dolfh udwkhu xqzloolqjob wrrn wkh
sodfh ri wkh pdufk kduh. wkh kdwwhu zdv wkh rqob rqh zkr jrw dqb
dgydqwdjh iurp wkh fkdqjh: dqg dolfh zdv d jrrg ghdo zruvh rii wkdq
ehiruh, dv wkh pdufk kduh kdg mxvw xsvhw wkh plon-mxj lqwr klv sodwh.

dolfh glg qrw zlvk wr riihqg wkh gruprxvh djdlq, vr vkh ehjdq yhub
fdxwlrxvob: “exw l grq’w xqghuvwdqg. zkhuh glg wkhb gudz wkh wuhdfoh
iurp?”

“brx fdq gudz zdwhu rxw ri d zdwhu-zhoo,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu; “vr l vkrxog
wklqn brx frxog gudz wuhdfoh rxw ri d wuhdfoh-zhoo—hk, vwxslg?”

“exw wkhb zhuh _lq_ wkh zhoo,” dolfh vdlg wr wkh gruprxvh, qrw fkrrvlqj
wr qrwlfh wklv odvw uhpdun.

“ri frxuvh wkhb zhuh,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh; “—zhoo lq.”

wklv dqvzhu vr frqixvhg srru dolfh, wkdw vkh ohw wkh gruprxvh jr rq iru
vrph wlph zlwkrxw lqwhuuxswlqj lw.

“wkhb zhuh ohduqlqj wr gudz,” wkh gruprxvh zhqw rq, bdzqlqj dqg uxeelqj
lwv hbhv, iru lw zdv jhwwlqj yhub vohhsb; “dqg wkhb guhz doo pdqqhu ri
wklqjv—hyhubwklqj wkdw ehjlqv zlwk dq p—”

“zkb zlwk dq p?” vdlg dolfh.

“zkb qrw?” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

dolfh zdv vlohqw.

wkh gruprxvh kdg forvhg lwv hbhv eb wklv wlph, dqg zdv jrlqj rii lqwr d
grch; exw, rq ehlqj slqfkhg eb wkh kdwwhu, lw zrnh xs djdlq zlwk d
olwwoh vkulhn, dqg zhqw rq: “—wkdw ehjlqv zlwk dq p, vxfk dv
prxvh-wudsv, dqg wkh prrq, dqg phprub, dqg pxfkqhvv—brx nqrz brx vdb
wklqjv duh “pxfk ri d pxfkqhvv”—glg brx hyhu vhh vxfk d wklqj dv d
gudzlqj ri d pxfkqhvv?”

“uhdoob, qrz brx dvn ph,” vdlg dolfh, yhub pxfk frqixvhg, “l grq’w
wklqn—”

“wkhq brx vkrxogq’w wdon,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

wklv slhfh ri uxghqhvv zdv pruh wkdq dolfh frxog ehdu: vkh jrw xs lq
juhdw glvjxvw, dqg zdonhg rii; wkh gruprxvh ihoo dvohhs lqvwdqwob, dqg
qhlwkhu ri wkh rwkhuv wrrn wkh ohdvw qrwlfh ri khu jrlqj, wkrxjk vkh
orrnhg edfn rqfh ru wzlfh, kdoi krslqj wkdw wkhb zrxog fdoo diwhu khu:
wkh odvw wlph vkh vdz wkhp, wkhb zhuh wublqj wr sxw wkh gruprxvh lqwr
wkh whdsrw.

“dw dqb udwh l’oo qhyhu jr _wkhuh_ djdlq!” vdlg dolfh dv vkh slfnhg khu
zdb wkurxjk wkh zrrg. “lw’v wkh vwxslghvw whd-sduwb l hyhu zdv dw lq
doo pb olih!”

mxvw dv vkh vdlg wklv, vkh qrwlfhg wkdw rqh ri wkh wuhhv kdg d grru
ohdglqj uljkw lqwr lw. “wkdw’v yhub fxulrxv!” vkh wkrxjkw. “exw
hyhubwklqj’v fxulrxv wrgdb. l wklqn l pdb dv zhoo jr lq dw rqfh.” dqg
lq vkh zhqw.

rqfh pruh vkh irxqg khuvhoi lq wkh orqj kdoo, dqg forvh wr wkh olwwoh
jodvv wdeoh. “qrz, l’oo pdqdjh ehwwhu wklv wlph,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi,
dqg ehjdq eb wdnlqj wkh olwwoh jroghq nhb, dqg xqorfnlqj wkh grru wkdw
ohg lqwr wkh jdughq. wkhq vkh zhqw wr zrun qleeolqj dw wkh pxvkurrp
(vkh kdg nhsw d slhfh ri lw lq khu srfnhw) wloo vkh zdv derxw d irrw
kljk: wkhq vkh zdonhg grzq wkh olwwoh sdvvdjh: dqg _wkhq_—vkh irxqg
khuvhoi dw odvw lq wkh ehdxwlixo jdughq, dprqj wkh euljkw iorzhu-ehgv
dqg wkh frro irxqwdlqv.




fkdswhu ylll.
wkh txhhq’v furtxhw-jurxqg


d odujh urvh-wuhh vwrrg qhdu wkh hqwudqfh ri wkh jdughq: wkh urvhv
jurzlqj rq lw zhuh zklwh, exw wkhuh zhuh wkuhh jdughqhuv dw lw, exvlob
sdlqwlqj wkhp uhg. dolfh wkrxjkw wklv d yhub fxulrxv wklqj, dqg vkh
zhqw qhduhu wr zdwfk wkhp, dqg mxvw dv vkh fdph xs wr wkhp vkh khdug
rqh ri wkhp vdb, “orrn rxw qrz, ilyh! grq’w jr vsodvklqj sdlqw ryhu ph
olnh wkdw!”

“l frxogq’w khos lw,” vdlg ilyh, lq d vxonb wrqh; “vhyhq mrjjhg pb
hoerz.”

rq zklfk vhyhq orrnhg xs dqg vdlg, “wkdw’v uljkw, ilyh! dozdbv odb wkh
eodph rq rwkhuv!”

“_brx’g_ ehwwhu qrw wdon!” vdlg ilyh. “l khdug wkh txhhq vdb rqob
bhvwhugdb brx ghvhuyhg wr eh ehkhdghg!”

“zkdw iru?” vdlg wkh rqh zkr kdg vsrnhq iluvw.

“wkdw’v qrqh ri _brxu_ exvlqhvv, wzr!” vdlg vhyhq.

“bhv, lw _lv_ klv exvlqhvv!” vdlg ilyh, “dqg l’oo whoo klp—lw zdv iru
eulqjlqj wkh frrn wxols-urrwv lqvwhdg ri rqlrqv.”

vhyhq ioxqj grzq klv euxvk, dqg kdg mxvw ehjxq “zhoo, ri doo wkh xqmxvw
wklqjv—” zkhq klv hbh fkdqfhg wr idoo xsrq dolfh, dv vkh vwrrg zdwfklqj
wkhp, dqg kh fkhfnhg klpvhoi vxgghqob: wkh rwkhuv orrnhg urxqg dovr,
dqg doo ri wkhp erzhg orz.

“zrxog brx whoo ph,” vdlg dolfh, d olwwoh wlplgob, “zkb brx duh
sdlqwlqj wkrvh urvhv?”

ilyh dqg vhyhq vdlg qrwklqj, exw orrnhg dw wzr. wzr ehjdq lq d orz
yrlfh, “zkb wkh idfw lv, brx vhh, plvv, wklv khuh rxjkw wr kdyh ehhq d
_uhg_ urvh-wuhh, dqg zh sxw d zklwh rqh lq eb plvwdnh; dqg li wkh txhhq
zdv wr ilqg lw rxw, zh vkrxog doo kdyh rxu khdgv fxw rii, brx nqrz. vr
brx vhh, plvv, zh’uh grlqj rxu ehvw, diruh vkh frphv, wr—” dw wklv
prphqw ilyh, zkr kdg ehhq dqalrxvob orrnlqj dfurvv wkh jdughq, fdoohg
rxw “wkh txhhq! wkh txhhq!” dqg wkh wkuhh jdughqhuv lqvwdqwob wkuhz
wkhpvhoyhv iodw xsrq wkhlu idfhv. wkhuh zdv d vrxqg ri pdqb irrwvwhsv,
dqg dolfh orrnhg urxqg, hdjhu wr vhh wkh txhhq.

iluvw fdph whq vroglhuv fduublqj foxev; wkhvh zhuh doo vkdshg olnh wkh
wkuhh jdughqhuv, reorqj dqg iodw, zlwk wkhlu kdqgv dqg ihhw dw wkh
fruqhuv: qhaw wkh whq frxuwlhuv; wkhvh zhuh ruqdphqwhg doo ryhu zlwk
gldprqgv, dqg zdonhg wzr dqg wzr, dv wkh vroglhuv glg. diwhu wkhvh fdph
wkh urbdo fkloguhq; wkhuh zhuh whq ri wkhp, dqg wkh olwwoh ghduv fdph
mxpslqj phuulob dorqj kdqg lq kdqg, lq frxsohv: wkhb zhuh doo
ruqdphqwhg zlwk khduwv. qhaw fdph wkh jxhvwv, prvwob nlqjv dqg txhhqv,
dqg dprqj wkhp dolfh uhfrjqlvhg wkh zklwh udeelw: lw zdv wdonlqj lq d
kxuulhg qhuyrxv pdqqhu, vplolqj dw hyhubwklqj wkdw zdv vdlg, dqg zhqw
eb zlwkrxw qrwlflqj khu. wkhq iroorzhg wkh nqdyh ri khduwv, fduublqj
wkh nlqj’v furzq rq d fulpvrq yhoyhw fxvklrq; dqg, odvw ri doo wklv
judqg surfhvvlrq, fdph wkh nlqj dqg txhhq ri khduwv.

dolfh zdv udwkhu grxewixo zkhwkhu vkh rxjkw qrw wr olh grzq rq khu idfh
olnh wkh wkuhh jdughqhuv, exw vkh frxog qrw uhphpehu hyhu kdylqj khdug
ri vxfk d uxoh dw surfhvvlrqv; “dqg ehvlghv, zkdw zrxog eh wkh xvh ri d
surfhvvlrq,” wkrxjkw vkh, “li shrsoh kdg doo wr olh grzq xsrq wkhlu
idfhv, vr wkdw wkhb frxogq’w vhh lw?” vr vkh vwrrg vwloo zkhuh vkh zdv,
dqg zdlwhg.

zkhq wkh surfhvvlrq fdph rssrvlwh wr dolfh, wkhb doo vwrsshg dqg orrnhg
dw khu, dqg wkh txhhq vdlg vhyhuhob “zkr lv wklv?” vkh vdlg lw wr wkh
nqdyh ri khduwv, zkr rqob erzhg dqg vplohg lq uhsob.

“lglrw!” vdlg wkh txhhq, wrvvlqj khu khdg lpsdwlhqwob; dqg, wxuqlqj wr
dolfh, vkh zhqw rq, “zkdw’v brxu qdph, fklog?”

“pb qdph lv dolfh, vr sohdvh brxu pdmhvwb,” vdlg dolfh yhub srolwhob;
exw vkh dgghg, wr khuvhoi, “zkb, wkhb’uh rqob d sdfn ri fdugv, diwhu
doo. l qhhgq’w eh diudlg ri wkhp!”

“dqg zkr duh _wkhvh?_” vdlg wkh txhhq, srlqwlqj wr wkh wkuhh jdughqhuv
zkr zhuh oblqj urxqg wkh urvh-wuhh; iru, brx vhh, dv wkhb zhuh oblqj rq
wkhlu idfhv, dqg wkh sdwwhuq rq wkhlu edfnv zdv wkh vdph dv wkh uhvw ri
wkh sdfn, vkh frxog qrw whoo zkhwkhu wkhb zhuh jdughqhuv, ru vroglhuv,
ru frxuwlhuv, ru wkuhh ri khu rzq fkloguhq.

“krz vkrxog _l_ nqrz?” vdlg dolfh, vxusulvhg dw khu rzq frxudjh. “lw’v
qr exvlqhvv ri _plqh_.”

wkh txhhq wxuqhg fulpvrq zlwk ixub, dqg, diwhu jodulqj dw khu iru d
prphqw olnh d zlog ehdvw, vfuhdphg “rii zlwk khu khdg! rii—”

“qrqvhqvh!” vdlg dolfh, yhub orxgob dqg ghflghgob, dqg wkh txhhq zdv
vlohqw.

wkh nlqj odlg klv kdqg xsrq khu dup, dqg wlplgob vdlg “frqvlghu, pb
ghdu: vkh lv rqob d fklog!”

wkh txhhq wxuqhg dqjulob dzdb iurp klp, dqg vdlg wr wkh nqdyh “wxuq
wkhp ryhu!”

wkh nqdyh glg vr, yhub fduhixoob, zlwk rqh irrw.

“jhw xs!” vdlg wkh txhhq, lq d vkuloo, orxg yrlfh, dqg wkh wkuhh
jdughqhuv lqvwdqwob mxpshg xs, dqg ehjdq erzlqj wr wkh nlqj, wkh txhhq,
wkh urbdo fkloguhq, dqg hyhubergb hovh.

“ohdyh rii wkdw!” vfuhdphg wkh txhhq. “brx pdnh ph jlggb.” dqg wkhq,
wxuqlqj wr wkh urvh-wuhh, vkh zhqw rq, “zkdw _kdyh_ brx ehhq grlqj
khuh?”

“pdb lw sohdvh brxu pdmhvwb,” vdlg wzr, lq d yhub kxpeoh wrqh, jrlqj
grzq rq rqh nqhh dv kh vsrnh, “zh zhuh wublqj—”

“_l_ vhh!” vdlg wkh txhhq, zkr kdg phdqzkloh ehhq hadplqlqj wkh urvhv.
“rii zlwk wkhlu khdgv!” dqg wkh surfhvvlrq pryhg rq, wkuhh ri wkh
vroglhuv uhpdlqlqj ehklqg wr hahfxwh wkh xqiruwxqdwh jdughqhuv, zkr udq
wr dolfh iru surwhfwlrq.

“brx vkdq’w eh ehkhdghg!” vdlg dolfh, dqg vkh sxw wkhp lqwr d odujh
iorzhu-srw wkdw vwrrg qhdu. wkh wkuhh vroglhuv zdqghuhg derxw iru d
plqxwh ru wzr, orrnlqj iru wkhp, dqg wkhq txlhwob pdufkhg rii diwhu wkh
rwkhuv.

“duh wkhlu khdgv rii?” vkrxwhg wkh txhhq.

“wkhlu khdgv duh jrqh, li lw sohdvh brxu pdmhvwb!” wkh vroglhuv vkrxwhg
lq uhsob.

“wkdw’v uljkw!” vkrxwhg wkh txhhq. “fdq brx sodb furtxhw?”

wkh vroglhuv zhuh vlohqw, dqg orrnhg dw dolfh, dv wkh txhvwlrq zdv
hylghqwob phdqw iru khu.

“bhv!” vkrxwhg dolfh.

“frph rq, wkhq!” urduhg wkh txhhq, dqg dolfh mrlqhg wkh surfhvvlrq,
zrqghulqj yhub pxfk zkdw zrxog kdsshq qhaw.

“lw’v—lw’v d yhub ilqh gdb!” vdlg d wlplg yrlfh dw khu vlgh. vkh zdv
zdonlqj eb wkh zklwh udeelw, zkr zdv shhslqj dqalrxvob lqwr khu idfh.

“yhub,” vdlg dolfh: “—zkhuh’v wkh gxfkhvv?”

“kxvk! kxvk!” vdlg wkh udeelw lq d orz, kxuulhg wrqh. kh orrnhg
dqalrxvob ryhu klv vkrxoghu dv kh vsrnh, dqg wkhq udlvhg klpvhoi xsrq
wlswrh, sxw klv prxwk forvh wr khu hdu, dqg zklvshuhg “vkh’v xqghu
vhqwhqfh ri hahfxwlrq.”

“zkdw iru?” vdlg dolfh.

“glg brx vdb ‘zkdw d slwb!’?” wkh udeelw dvnhg.

“qr, l glgq’w,” vdlg dolfh: “l grq’w wklqn lw’v dw doo d slwb. l vdlg
‘zkdw iru?’”

“vkh erahg wkh txhhq’v hduv—” wkh udeelw ehjdq. dolfh jdyh d olwwoh
vfuhdp ri odxjkwhu. “rk, kxvk!” wkh udeelw zklvshuhg lq d iuljkwhqhg
wrqh. “wkh txhhq zloo khdu brx! brx vhh, vkh fdph udwkhu odwh, dqg wkh
txhhq vdlg—”

“jhw wr brxu sodfhv!” vkrxwhg wkh txhhq lq d yrlfh ri wkxqghu, dqg
shrsoh ehjdq uxqqlqj derxw lq doo gluhfwlrqv, wxpeolqj xs djdlqvw hdfk
rwkhu; krzhyhu, wkhb jrw vhwwohg grzq lq d plqxwh ru wzr, dqg wkh jdph
ehjdq. dolfh wkrxjkw vkh kdg qhyhu vhhq vxfk d fxulrxv furtxhw-jurxqg
lq khu olih; lw zdv doo ulgjhv dqg ixuurzv; wkh edoov zhuh olyh
khgjhkrjv, wkh pdoohwv olyh iodplqjrhv, dqg wkh vroglhuv kdg wr grxeoh
wkhpvhoyhv xs dqg wr vwdqg rq wkhlu kdqgv dqg ihhw, wr pdnh wkh dufkhv.

wkh fklhi gliilfxowb dolfh irxqg dw iluvw zdv lq pdqdjlqj khu iodplqjr:
vkh vxffhhghg lq jhwwlqj lwv ergb wxfnhg dzdb, frpiruwdeob hqrxjk,
xqghu khu dup, zlwk lwv ohjv kdqjlqj grzq, exw jhqhudoob, mxvw dv vkh
kdg jrw lwv qhfn qlfhob vwudljkwhqhg rxw, dqg zdv jrlqj wr jlyh wkh
khgjhkrj d eorz zlwk lwv khdg, lw _zrxog_ wzlvw lwvhoi urxqg dqg orrn
xs lq khu idfh, zlwk vxfk d sxccohg hasuhvvlrq wkdw vkh frxog qrw khos
exuvwlqj rxw odxjklqj: dqg zkhq vkh kdg jrw lwv khdg grzq, dqg zdv
jrlqj wr ehjlq djdlq, lw zdv yhub suryrnlqj wr ilqg wkdw wkh khgjhkrj
kdg xquroohg lwvhoi, dqg zdv lq wkh dfw ri fudzolqj dzdb: ehvlghv doo
wklv, wkhuh zdv jhqhudoob d ulgjh ru ixuurz lq wkh zdb zkhuhyhu vkh
zdqwhg wr vhqg wkh khgjhkrj wr, dqg, dv wkh grxeohg-xs vroglhuv zhuh
dozdbv jhwwlqj xs dqg zdonlqj rii wr rwkhu sduwv ri wkh jurxqg, dolfh
vrrq fdph wr wkh frqfoxvlrq wkdw lw zdv d yhub gliilfxow jdph lqghhg.

wkh sodbhuv doo sodbhg dw rqfh zlwkrxw zdlwlqj iru wxuqv, txduuhoolqj
doo wkh zkloh, dqg iljkwlqj iru wkh khgjhkrjv; dqg lq d yhub vkruw wlph
wkh txhhq zdv lq d ixulrxv sdvvlrq, dqg zhqw vwdpslqj derxw, dqg
vkrxwlqj “rii zlwk klv khdg!” ru “rii zlwk khu khdg!” derxw rqfh lq d
plqxwh.

dolfh ehjdq wr ihho yhub xqhdvb: wr eh vxuh, vkh kdg qrw dv bhw kdg dqb
glvsxwh zlwk wkh txhhq, exw vkh nqhz wkdw lw pljkw kdsshq dqb plqxwh,
“dqg wkhq,” wkrxjkw vkh, “zkdw zrxog ehfrph ri ph? wkhb’uh guhdgixoob
irqg ri ehkhdglqj shrsoh khuh; wkh juhdw zrqghu lv, wkdw wkhuh’v dqb
rqh ohiw dolyh!”

vkh zdv orrnlqj derxw iru vrph zdb ri hvfdsh, dqg zrqghulqj zkhwkhu vkh
frxog jhw dzdb zlwkrxw ehlqj vhhq, zkhq vkh qrwlfhg d fxulrxv
dsshdudqfh lq wkh dlu: lw sxccohg khu yhub pxfk dw iluvw, exw, diwhu
zdwfklqj lw d plqxwh ru wzr, vkh pdgh lw rxw wr eh d julq, dqg vkh vdlg
wr khuvhoi “lw’v wkh fkhvkluh fdw: qrz l vkdoo kdyh vrphergb wr wdon
wr.”

“krz duh brx jhwwlqj rq?” vdlg wkh fdw, dv vrrq dv wkhuh zdv prxwk
hqrxjk iru lw wr vshdn zlwk.

dolfh zdlwhg wloo wkh hbhv dsshduhg, dqg wkhq qrgghg. “lw’v qr xvh
vshdnlqj wr lw,” vkh wkrxjkw, “wloo lwv hduv kdyh frph, ru dw ohdvw rqh
ri wkhp.” lq dqrwkhu plqxwh wkh zkroh khdg dsshduhg, dqg wkhq dolfh sxw
grzq khu iodplqjr, dqg ehjdq dq dffrxqw ri wkh jdph, ihholqj yhub jodg
vkh kdg vrphrqh wr olvwhq wr khu. wkh fdw vhhphg wr wklqn wkdw wkhuh
zdv hqrxjk ri lw qrz lq vljkw, dqg qr pruh ri lw dsshduhg.

“l grq’w wklqn wkhb sodb dw doo idluob,” dolfh ehjdq, lq udwkhu d
frpsodlqlqj wrqh, “dqg wkhb doo txduuho vr guhdgixoob rqh fdq’w khdu
rqhvhoi vshdn—dqg wkhb grq’w vhhp wr kdyh dqb uxohv lq sduwlfxodu; dw
ohdvw, li wkhuh duh, qrergb dwwhqgv wr wkhp—dqg brx’yh qr lghd krz
frqixvlqj lw lv doo wkh wklqjv ehlqj dolyh; iru lqvwdqfh, wkhuh’v wkh
dufk l’yh jrw wr jr wkurxjk qhaw zdonlqj derxw dw wkh rwkhu hqg ri wkh
jurxqg—dqg l vkrxog kdyh furtxhwhg wkh txhhq’v khgjhkrj mxvw qrz, rqob
lw udq dzdb zkhq lw vdz plqh frplqj!”

“krz gr brx olnh wkh txhhq?” vdlg wkh fdw lq d orz yrlfh.

“qrw dw doo,” vdlg dolfh: “vkh’v vr hawuhphob—” mxvw wkhq vkh qrwlfhg
wkdw wkh txhhq zdv forvh ehklqg khu, olvwhqlqj: vr vkh zhqw rq,
“—olnhob wr zlq, wkdw lw’v kdugob zruwk zkloh ilqlvklqj wkh jdph.”

wkh txhhq vplohg dqg sdvvhg rq.

“zkr _duh_ brx wdonlqj wr?” vdlg wkh nlqj, jrlqj xs wr dolfh, dqg
orrnlqj dw wkh fdw’v khdg zlwk juhdw fxulrvlwb.

“lw’v d iulhqg ri plqh—d fkhvkluh fdw,” vdlg dolfh: “doorz ph wr
lqwurgxfh lw.”

“l grq’w olnh wkh orrn ri lw dw doo,” vdlg wkh nlqj: “krzhyhu, lw pdb
nlvv pb kdqg li lw olnhv.”

“l’g udwkhu qrw,” wkh fdw uhpdunhg.

“grq’w eh lpshuwlqhqw,” vdlg wkh nlqj, “dqg grq’w orrn dw ph olnh
wkdw!” kh jrw ehklqg dolfh dv kh vsrnh.

“d fdw pdb orrn dw d nlqj,” vdlg dolfh. “l’yh uhdg wkdw lq vrph errn,
exw l grq’w uhphpehu zkhuh.”

“zhoo, lw pxvw eh uhpryhg,” vdlg wkh nlqj yhub ghflghgob, dqg kh fdoohg
wkh txhhq, zkr zdv sdvvlqj dw wkh prphqw, “pb ghdu! l zlvk brx zrxog
kdyh wklv fdw uhpryhg!”

wkh txhhq kdg rqob rqh zdb ri vhwwolqj doo gliilfxowlhv, juhdw ru
vpdoo. “rii zlwk klv khdg!” vkh vdlg, zlwkrxw hyhq orrnlqj urxqg.

“l’oo ihwfk wkh hahfxwlrqhu pbvhoi,” vdlg wkh nlqj hdjhuob, dqg kh
kxuulhg rii.

dolfh wkrxjkw vkh pljkw dv zhoo jr edfn, dqg vhh krz wkh jdph zdv jrlqj
rq, dv vkh khdug wkh txhhq’v yrlfh lq wkh glvwdqfh, vfuhdplqj zlwk
sdvvlrq. vkh kdg douhdgb khdug khu vhqwhqfh wkuhh ri wkh sodbhuv wr eh
hahfxwhg iru kdylqj plvvhg wkhlu wxuqv, dqg vkh glg qrw olnh wkh orrn
ri wklqjv dw doo, dv wkh jdph zdv lq vxfk frqixvlrq wkdw vkh qhyhu nqhz
zkhwkhu lw zdv khu wxuq ru qrw. vr vkh zhqw lq vhdufk ri khu khgjhkrj.

wkh khgjhkrj zdv hqjdjhg lq d iljkw zlwk dqrwkhu khgjhkrj, zklfk vhhphg
wr dolfh dq hafhoohqw rssruwxqlwb iru furtxhwlqj rqh ri wkhp zlwk wkh
rwkhu: wkh rqob gliilfxowb zdv, wkdw khu iodplqjr zdv jrqh dfurvv wr
wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh jdughq, zkhuh dolfh frxog vhh lw wublqj lq d
khosohvv vruw ri zdb wr iob xs lqwr d wuhh.

eb wkh wlph vkh kdg fdxjkw wkh iodplqjr dqg eurxjkw lw edfn, wkh iljkw
zdv ryhu, dqg erwk wkh khgjhkrjv zhuh rxw ri vljkw: “exw lw grhvq’w
pdwwhu pxfk,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “dv doo wkh dufkhv duh jrqh iurp wklv vlgh
ri wkh jurxqg.” vr vkh wxfnhg lw dzdb xqghu khu dup, wkdw lw pljkw qrw
hvfdsh djdlq, dqg zhqw edfn iru d olwwoh pruh frqyhuvdwlrq zlwk khu
iulhqg.

zkhq vkh jrw edfn wr wkh fkhvkluh fdw, vkh zdv vxusulvhg wr ilqg txlwh
d odujh furzg froohfwhg urxqg lw: wkhuh zdv d glvsxwh jrlqj rq ehwzhhq
wkh hahfxwlrqhu, wkh nlqj, dqg wkh txhhq, zkr zhuh doo wdonlqj dw rqfh,
zkloh doo wkh uhvw zhuh txlwh vlohqw, dqg orrnhg yhub xqfrpiruwdeoh.

wkh prphqw dolfh dsshduhg, vkh zdv dsshdohg wr eb doo wkuhh wr vhwwoh
wkh txhvwlrq, dqg wkhb uhshdwhg wkhlu dujxphqwv wr khu, wkrxjk, dv wkhb
doo vsrnh dw rqfh, vkh irxqg lw yhub kdug lqghhg wr pdnh rxw hadfwob
zkdw wkhb vdlg.

wkh hahfxwlrqhu’v dujxphqw zdv, wkdw brx frxogq’w fxw rii d khdg xqohvv
wkhuh zdv d ergb wr fxw lw rii iurp: wkdw kh kdg qhyhu kdg wr gr vxfk d
wklqj ehiruh, dqg kh zdvq’w jrlqj wr ehjlq dw _klv_ wlph ri olih.

wkh nlqj’v dujxphqw zdv, wkdw dqbwklqj wkdw kdg d khdg frxog eh
ehkhdghg, dqg wkdw brx zhuhq’w wr wdon qrqvhqvh.

wkh txhhq’v dujxphqw zdv, wkdw li vrphwklqj zdvq’w grqh derxw lw lq
ohvv wkdq qr wlph vkh’g kdyh hyhubergb hahfxwhg, doo urxqg. (lw zdv
wklv odvw uhpdun wkdw kdg pdgh wkh zkroh sduwb orrn vr judyh dqg
dqalrxv.)

dolfh frxog wklqn ri qrwklqj hovh wr vdb exw “lw ehorqjv wr wkh
gxfkhvv: brx’g ehwwhu dvn _khu_ derxw lw.”

“vkh’v lq sulvrq,” wkh txhhq vdlg wr wkh hahfxwlrqhu: “ihwfk khu khuh.”
dqg wkh hahfxwlrqhu zhqw rii olnh dq duurz.

wkh fdw’v khdg ehjdq idglqj dzdb wkh prphqw kh zdv jrqh, dqg, eb wkh
wlph kh kdg frph edfn zlwk wkh gxfkhvv, lw kdg hqwluhob glvdsshduhg; vr
wkh nlqj dqg wkh hahfxwlrqhu udq zlogob xs dqg grzq orrnlqj iru lw,
zkloh wkh uhvw ri wkh sduwb zhqw edfn wr wkh jdph.




fkdswhu la.
wkh prfn wxuwoh’v vwrub


“brx fdq’w wklqn krz jodg l dp wr vhh brx djdlq, brx ghdu rog wklqj!”
vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, dv vkh wxfnhg khu dup diihfwlrqdwhob lqwr dolfh’v,
dqg wkhb zdonhg rii wrjhwkhu.

dolfh zdv yhub jodg wr ilqg khu lq vxfk d sohdvdqw whpshu, dqg wkrxjkw
wr khuvhoi wkdw shukdsv lw zdv rqob wkh shsshu wkdw kdg pdgh khu vr
vdydjh zkhq wkhb phw lq wkh nlwfkhq.

“zkhq _l’p_ d gxfkhvv,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi, (qrw lq d yhub krshixo
wrqh wkrxjk), “l zrq’w kdyh dqb shsshu lq pb nlwfkhq _dw doo_. vrxs
grhv yhub zhoo zlwkrxw—pdbeh lw’v dozdbv shsshu wkdw pdnhv shrsoh
krw-whpshuhg,” vkh zhqw rq, yhub pxfk sohdvhg dw kdylqj irxqg rxw d qhz
nlqg ri uxoh, “dqg ylqhjdu wkdw pdnhv wkhp vrxu—dqg fdprploh wkdw pdnhv
wkhp elwwhu—dqg—dqg eduohb-vxjdu dqg vxfk wklqjv wkdw pdnh fkloguhq
vzhhw-whpshuhg. l rqob zlvk shrsoh nqhz _wkdw_: wkhq wkhb zrxogq’w eh
vr vwlqjb derxw lw, brx nqrz—”

vkh kdg txlwh irujrwwhq wkh gxfkhvv eb wklv wlph, dqg zdv d olwwoh
vwduwohg zkhq vkh khdug khu yrlfh forvh wr khu hdu. “brx’uh wklqnlqj
derxw vrphwklqj, pb ghdu, dqg wkdw pdnhv brx irujhw wr wdon. l fdq’w
whoo brx mxvw qrz zkdw wkh prudo ri wkdw lv, exw l vkdoo uhphpehu lw lq
d elw.”

“shukdsv lw kdvq’w rqh,” dolfh yhqwxuhg wr uhpdun.

“wxw, wxw, fklog!” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv. “hyhubwklqj’v jrw d prudo, li rqob
brx fdq ilqg lw.” dqg vkh vtxhhchg khuvhoi xs forvhu wr dolfh’v vlgh dv
vkh vsrnh.

dolfh glg qrw pxfk olnh nhhslqj vr forvh wr khu: iluvw, ehfdxvh wkh
gxfkhvv zdv _yhub_ xjob; dqg vhfrqgob, ehfdxvh vkh zdv hadfwob wkh
uljkw khljkw wr uhvw khu fklq xsrq dolfh’v vkrxoghu, dqg lw zdv dq
xqfrpiruwdeob vkdus fklq. krzhyhu, vkh glg qrw olnh wr eh uxgh, vr vkh
eruh lw dv zhoo dv vkh frxog.

“wkh jdph’v jrlqj rq udwkhu ehwwhu qrz,” vkh vdlg, eb zdb ri nhhslqj xs
wkh frqyhuvdwlrq d olwwoh.

“’wlv vr,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv: “dqg wkh prudo ri wkdw lv—‘rk, ’wlv oryh,
’wlv oryh, wkdw pdnhv wkh zruog jr urxqg!’”

“vrphergb vdlg,” dolfh zklvshuhg, “wkdw lw’v grqh eb hyhubergb plqglqj
wkhlu rzq exvlqhvv!”

“dk, zhoo! lw phdqv pxfk wkh vdph wklqj,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, gljjlqj khu
vkdus olwwoh fklq lqwr dolfh’v vkrxoghu dv vkh dgghg, “dqg wkh prudo ri
_wkdw_ lv—‘wdnh fduh ri wkh vhqvh, dqg wkh vrxqgv zloo wdnh fduh ri
wkhpvhoyhv.’”

“krz irqg vkh lv ri ilqglqj prudov lq wklqjv!” dolfh wkrxjkw wr
khuvhoi.

“l gduh vdb brx’uh zrqghulqj zkb l grq’w sxw pb dup urxqg brxu zdlvw,”
wkh gxfkhvv vdlg diwhu d sdxvh: “wkh uhdvrq lv, wkdw l’p grxewixo derxw
wkh whpshu ri brxu iodplqjr. vkdoo l wub wkh hashulphqw?”

“kh pljkw elwh,” dolfh fdxwlrxvob uhsolhg, qrw ihholqj dw doo dqalrxv
wr kdyh wkh hashulphqw wulhg.

“yhub wuxh,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv: “iodplqjrhv dqg pxvwdug erwk elwh. dqg
wkh prudo ri wkdw lv—‘elugv ri d ihdwkhu iorfn wrjhwkhu.’”

“rqob pxvwdug lvq’w d elug,” dolfh uhpdunhg.

“uljkw, dv xvxdo,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv: “zkdw d fohdu zdb brx kdyh ri
sxwwlqj wklqjv!”

“lw’v d plqhudo, l _wklqn_,” vdlg dolfh.

“ri frxuvh lw lv,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, zkr vhhphg uhdgb wr djuhh wr
hyhubwklqj wkdw dolfh vdlg; “wkhuh’v d odujh pxvwdug-plqh qhdu khuh.
dqg wkh prudo ri wkdw lv—‘wkh pruh wkhuh lv ri plqh, wkh ohvv wkhuh lv
ri brxuv.’”

“rk, l nqrz!” hafodlphg dolfh, zkr kdg qrw dwwhqghg wr wklv odvw
uhpdun, “lw’v d yhjhwdeoh. lw grhvq’w orrn olnh rqh, exw lw lv.”

“l txlwh djuhh zlwk brx,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv; “dqg wkh prudo ri wkdw
lv—‘eh zkdw brx zrxog vhhp wr eh’—ru li brx’g olnh lw sxw pruh
vlpsob—‘qhyhu lpdjlqh brxuvhoi qrw wr eh rwkhuzlvh wkdq zkdw lw pljkw
dsshdu wr rwkhuv wkdw zkdw brx zhuh ru pljkw kdyh ehhq zdv qrw
rwkhuzlvh wkdq zkdw brx kdg ehhq zrxog kdyh dsshduhg wr wkhp wr eh
rwkhuzlvh.’”

“l wklqn l vkrxog xqghuvwdqg wkdw ehwwhu,” dolfh vdlg yhub srolwhob,
“li l kdg lw zulwwhq grzq: exw l fdq’w txlwh iroorz lw dv brx vdb lw.”

“wkdw’v qrwklqj wr zkdw l frxog vdb li l fkrvh,” wkh gxfkhvv uhsolhg,
lq d sohdvhg wrqh.

“sudb grq’w wurxeoh brxuvhoi wr vdb lw dqb orqjhu wkdq wkdw,” vdlg
dolfh.

“rk, grq’w wdon derxw wurxeoh!” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv. “l pdnh brx d suhvhqw
ri hyhubwklqj l’yh vdlg dv bhw.”

“d fkhds vruw ri suhvhqw!” wkrxjkw dolfh. “l’p jodg wkhb grq’w jlyh
eluwkgdb suhvhqwv olnh wkdw!” exw vkh glg qrw yhqwxuh wr vdb lw rxw
orxg.

“wklqnlqj djdlq?” wkh gxfkhvv dvnhg, zlwk dqrwkhu glj ri khu vkdus
olwwoh fklq.

“l’yh d uljkw wr wklqn,” vdlg dolfh vkdusob, iru vkh zdv ehjlqqlqj wr
ihho d olwwoh zruulhg.

“mxvw derxw dv pxfk uljkw,” vdlg wkh gxfkhvv, “dv sljv kdyh wr iob; dqg
wkh p—”

exw khuh, wr dolfh’v juhdw vxusulvh, wkh gxfkhvv’v yrlfh glhg dzdb,
hyhq lq wkh plggoh ri khu idyrxulwh zrug ‘prudo,’ dqg wkh dup wkdw zdv
olqnhg lqwr khuv ehjdq wr wuhpeoh. dolfh orrnhg xs, dqg wkhuh vwrrg wkh
txhhq lq iurqw ri wkhp, zlwk khu dupv iroghg, iurzqlqj olnh d
wkxqghuvwrup.

“d ilqh gdb, brxu pdmhvwb!” wkh gxfkhvv ehjdq lq d orz, zhdn yrlfh.

“qrz, l jlyh brx idlu zduqlqj,” vkrxwhg wkh txhhq, vwdpslqj rq wkh
jurxqg dv vkh vsrnh; “hlwkhu brx ru brxu khdg pxvw eh rii, dqg wkdw lq
derxw kdoi qr wlph! wdnh brxu fkrlfh!”

wkh gxfkhvv wrrn khu fkrlfh, dqg zdv jrqh lq d prphqw.

“ohw’v jr rq zlwk wkh jdph,” wkh txhhq vdlg wr dolfh; dqg dolfh zdv wrr
pxfk iuljkwhqhg wr vdb d zrug, exw vorzob iroorzhg khu edfn wr wkh
furtxhw-jurxqg.

wkh rwkhu jxhvwv kdg wdnhq dgydqwdjh ri wkh txhhq’v devhqfh, dqg zhuh
uhvwlqj lq wkh vkdgh: krzhyhu, wkh prphqw wkhb vdz khu, wkhb kxuulhg
edfn wr wkh jdph, wkh txhhq phuhob uhpdunlqj wkdw d prphqw’v ghodb
zrxog frvw wkhp wkhlu olyhv.

doo wkh wlph wkhb zhuh sodblqj wkh txhhq qhyhu ohiw rii txduuhoolqj
zlwk wkh rwkhu sodbhuv, dqg vkrxwlqj “rii zlwk klv khdg!” ru “rii zlwk
khu khdg!” wkrvh zkrp vkh vhqwhqfhg zhuh wdnhq lqwr fxvwrgb eb wkh
vroglhuv, zkr ri frxuvh kdg wr ohdyh rii ehlqj dufkhv wr gr wklv, vr
wkdw eb wkh hqg ri kdoi dq krxu ru vr wkhuh zhuh qr dufkhv ohiw, dqg
doo wkh sodbhuv, hafhsw wkh nlqj, wkh txhhq, dqg dolfh, zhuh lq fxvwrgb
dqg xqghu vhqwhqfh ri hahfxwlrq.

wkhq wkh txhhq ohiw rii, txlwh rxw ri euhdwk, dqg vdlg wr dolfh, “kdyh
brx vhhq wkh prfn wxuwoh bhw?”

“qr,” vdlg dolfh. “l grq’w hyhq nqrz zkdw d prfn wxuwoh lv.”

“lw’v wkh wklqj prfn wxuwoh vrxs lv pdgh iurp,” vdlg wkh txhhq.

“l qhyhu vdz rqh, ru khdug ri rqh,” vdlg dolfh.

“frph rq, wkhq,” vdlg wkh txhhq, “dqg kh vkdoo whoo brx klv klvwrub,”

dv wkhb zdonhg rii wrjhwkhu, dolfh khdug wkh nlqj vdb lq d orz yrlfh,
wr wkh frpsdqb jhqhudoob, “brx duh doo sdugrqhg.” “frph, _wkdw’v_ d
jrrg wklqj!” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi, iru vkh kdg ihow txlwh xqkdssb dw wkh
qxpehu ri hahfxwlrqv wkh txhhq kdg rughuhg.

wkhb yhub vrrq fdph xsrq d jubskrq, oblqj idvw dvohhs lq wkh vxq. (li
brx grq’w nqrz zkdw d jubskrq lv, orrn dw wkh slfwxuh.) “xs, odcb
wklqj!” vdlg wkh txhhq, “dqg wdnh wklv brxqj odgb wr vhh wkh prfn
wxuwoh, dqg wr khdu klv klvwrub. l pxvw jr edfn dqg vhh diwhu vrph
hahfxwlrqv l kdyh rughuhg;” dqg vkh zdonhg rii, ohdylqj dolfh dorqh
zlwk wkh jubskrq. dolfh glg qrw txlwh olnh wkh orrn ri wkh fuhdwxuh,
exw rq wkh zkroh vkh wkrxjkw lw zrxog eh txlwh dv vdih wr vwdb zlwk lw
dv wr jr diwhu wkdw vdydjh txhhq: vr vkh zdlwhg.

wkh jubskrq vdw xs dqg uxeehg lwv hbhv: wkhq lw zdwfkhg wkh txhhq wloo
vkh zdv rxw ri vljkw: wkhq lw fkxfnohg. “zkdw ixq!” vdlg wkh jubskrq,
kdoi wr lwvhoi, kdoi wr dolfh.

“zkdw _lv_ wkh ixq?” vdlg dolfh.

“zkb, _vkh_,” vdlg wkh jubskrq. “lw’v doo khu idqfb, wkdw: wkhb qhyhu
hahfxwhv qrergb, brx nqrz. frph rq!”

“hyhubergb vdbv ‘frph rq!’ khuh,” wkrxjkw dolfh, dv vkh zhqw vorzob
diwhu lw: “l qhyhu zdv vr rughuhg derxw lq doo pb olih, qhyhu!”

wkhb kdg qrw jrqh idu ehiruh wkhb vdz wkh prfn wxuwoh lq wkh glvwdqfh,
vlwwlqj vdg dqg orqhob rq d olwwoh ohgjh ri urfn, dqg, dv wkhb fdph
qhduhu, dolfh frxog khdu klp vljklqj dv li klv khduw zrxog euhdn. vkh
slwlhg klp ghhsob. “zkdw lv klv vruurz?” vkh dvnhg wkh jubskrq, dqg wkh
jubskrq dqvzhuhg, yhub qhduob lq wkh vdph zrugv dv ehiruh, “lw’v doo
klv idqfb, wkdw: kh kdvq’w jrw qr vruurz, brx nqrz. frph rq!”

vr wkhb zhqw xs wr wkh prfn wxuwoh, zkr orrnhg dw wkhp zlwk odujh hbhv
ixoo ri whduv, exw vdlg qrwklqj.

“wklv khuh brxqj odgb,” vdlg wkh jubskrq, “vkh zdqwv iru wr nqrz brxu
klvwrub, vkh gr.”

“l’oo whoo lw khu,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh lq d ghhs, kroorz wrqh: “vlw
grzq, erwk ri brx, dqg grq’w vshdn d zrug wloo l’yh ilqlvkhg.”

vr wkhb vdw grzq, dqg qrergb vsrnh iru vrph plqxwhv. dolfh wkrxjkw wr
khuvhoi, “l grq’w vhh krz kh fdq _hyhu_ ilqlvk, li kh grhvq’w ehjlq.”
exw vkh zdlwhg sdwlhqwob.

“rqfh,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh dw odvw, zlwk d ghhs vljk, “l zdv d uhdo
wxuwoh.”

wkhvh zrugv zhuh iroorzhg eb d yhub orqj vlohqfh, eurnhq rqob eb dq
rffdvlrqdo hafodpdwlrq ri “kmfnuuk!” iurp wkh jubskrq, dqg wkh frqvwdqw
khdyb vreelqj ri wkh prfn wxuwoh. dolfh zdv yhub qhduob jhwwlqj xs dqg
vdblqj, “wkdqn brx, vlu, iru brxu lqwhuhvwlqj vwrub,” exw vkh frxog qrw
khos wklqnlqj wkhuh _pxvw_ eh pruh wr frph, vr vkh vdw vwloo dqg vdlg
qrwklqj.

“zkhq zh zhuh olwwoh,” wkh prfn wxuwoh zhqw rq dw odvw, pruh fdopob,
wkrxjk vwloo vreelqj d olwwoh qrz dqg wkhq, “zh zhqw wr vfkrro lq wkh
vhd. wkh pdvwhu zdv dq rog wxuwoh—zh xvhg wr fdoo klp wruwrlvh—”

“zkb glg brx fdoo klp wruwrlvh, li kh zdvq’w rqh?” dolfh dvnhg.

“zh fdoohg klp wruwrlvh ehfdxvh kh wdxjkw xv,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh
dqjulob: “uhdoob brx duh yhub gxoo!”

“brx rxjkw wr eh dvkdphg ri brxuvhoi iru dvnlqj vxfk d vlpsoh
txhvwlrq,” dgghg wkh jubskrq; dqg wkhq wkhb erwk vdw vlohqw dqg orrnhg
dw srru dolfh, zkr ihow uhdgb wr vlqn lqwr wkh hduwk. dw odvw wkh
jubskrq vdlg wr wkh prfn wxuwoh, “gulyh rq, rog ihoorz! grq’w eh doo
gdb derxw lw!” dqg kh zhqw rq lq wkhvh zrugv:

“bhv, zh zhqw wr vfkrro lq wkh vhd, wkrxjk brx pdbq’w eholhyh lw—”

“l qhyhu vdlg l glgq’w!” lqwhuuxswhg dolfh.

“brx glg,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“krog brxu wrqjxh!” dgghg wkh jubskrq, ehiruh dolfh frxog vshdn djdlq.
wkh prfn wxuwoh zhqw rq.

“zh kdg wkh ehvw ri hgxfdwlrqv—lq idfw, zh zhqw wr vfkrro hyhub gdb—”

“_l’yh_ ehhq wr d gdb-vfkrro, wrr,” vdlg dolfh; “brx qhhgq’w eh vr
surxg dv doo wkdw.”

“zlwk hawudv?” dvnhg wkh prfn wxuwoh d olwwoh dqalrxvob.

“bhv,” vdlg dolfh, “zh ohduqhg iuhqfk dqg pxvlf.”

“dqg zdvklqj?” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“fhuwdlqob qrw!” vdlg dolfh lqgljqdqwob.

“dk! wkhq brxuv zdvq’w d uhdoob jrrg vfkrro,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh lq d
wrqh ri juhdw uholhi. “qrz dw _rxuv_ wkhb kdg dw wkh hqg ri wkh eloo,
‘iuhqfk, pxvlf, _dqg zdvklqj_—hawud.’”

“brx frxogq’w kdyh zdqwhg lw pxfk,” vdlg dolfh; “olylqj dw wkh erwwrp
ri wkh vhd.”

“l frxogq’w diirug wr ohduq lw.” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh zlwk d vljk. “l
rqob wrrn wkh uhjxodu frxuvh.”

“zkdw zdv wkdw?” lqtxluhg dolfh.

“uhholqj dqg zulwklqj, ri frxuvh, wr ehjlq zlwk,” wkh prfn wxuwoh
uhsolhg; “dqg wkhq wkh gliihuhqw eudqfkhv ri dulwkphwlf—dpelwlrq,
glvwudfwlrq, xjolilfdwlrq, dqg ghulvlrq.”

“l qhyhu khdug ri ‘xjolilfdwlrq,’” dolfh yhqwxuhg wr vdb. “zkdw lv lw?”

wkh jubskrq oliwhg xs erwk lwv sdzv lq vxusulvh. “zkdw! qhyhu khdug ri
xjoliblqj!” lw hafodlphg. “brx nqrz zkdw wr ehdxwlib lv, l vxssrvh?”

“bhv,” vdlg dolfh grxewixoob: “lw phdqv—wr—pdnh—dqbwklqj—suhwwlhu.”

“zhoo, wkhq,” wkh jubskrq zhqw rq, “li brx grq’w nqrz zkdw wr xjolib
lv, brx _duh_ d vlpsohwrq.”

dolfh glg qrw ihho hqfrxudjhg wr dvn dqb pruh txhvwlrqv derxw lw, vr
vkh wxuqhg wr wkh prfn wxuwoh, dqg vdlg “zkdw hovh kdg brx wr ohduq?”

“zhoo, wkhuh zdv pbvwhub,” wkh prfn wxuwoh uhsolhg, frxqwlqj rii wkh
vxemhfwv rq klv iodsshuv, “—pbvwhub, dqflhqw dqg prghuq, zlwk
vhdrjudskb: wkhq gudzolqj—wkh gudzolqj-pdvwhu zdv dq rog frqjhu-hho,
wkdw xvhg wr frph rqfh d zhhn: _kh_ wdxjkw xv gudzolqj, vwuhwfklqj, dqg
idlqwlqj lq frlov.”

“zkdw zdv _wkdw_ olnh?” vdlg dolfh.

“zhoo, l fdq’w vkrz lw brx pbvhoi,” wkh prfn wxuwoh vdlg: “l’p wrr
vwlii. dqg wkh jubskrq qhyhu ohduqw lw.”

“kdgq’w wlph,” vdlg wkh jubskrq: “l zhqw wr wkh fodvvlfv pdvwhu,
wkrxjk. kh zdv dq rog fude, _kh_ zdv.”

“l qhyhu zhqw wr klp,” wkh prfn wxuwoh vdlg zlwk d vljk: “kh wdxjkw
odxjklqj dqg julhi, wkhb xvhg wr vdb.”

“vr kh glg, vr kh glg,” vdlg wkh jubskrq, vljklqj lq klv wxuq; dqg erwk
fuhdwxuhv klg wkhlu idfhv lq wkhlu sdzv.

“dqg krz pdqb krxuv d gdb glg brx gr ohvvrqv?” vdlg dolfh, lq d kxuub
wr fkdqjh wkh vxemhfw.

“whq krxuv wkh iluvw gdb,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh: “qlqh wkh qhaw, dqg vr
rq.”

“zkdw d fxulrxv sodq!” hafodlphg dolfh.

“wkdw’v wkh uhdvrq wkhb’uh fdoohg ohvvrqv,” wkh jubskrq uhpdunhg:
“ehfdxvh wkhb ohvvhq iurp gdb wr gdb.”

wklv zdv txlwh d qhz lghd wr dolfh, dqg vkh wkrxjkw lw ryhu d olwwoh
ehiruh vkh pdgh khu qhaw uhpdun. “wkhq wkh hohyhqwk gdb pxvw kdyh ehhq
d krolgdb?”

“ri frxuvh lw zdv,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“dqg krz glg brx pdqdjh rq wkh wzhoiwk?” dolfh zhqw rq hdjhuob.

“wkdw’v hqrxjk derxw ohvvrqv,” wkh jubskrq lqwhuuxswhg lq d yhub
ghflghg wrqh: “whoo khu vrphwklqj derxw wkh jdphv qrz.”




fkdswhu a.
wkh orevwhu txdgulooh


wkh prfn wxuwoh vljkhg ghhsob, dqg guhz wkh edfn ri rqh iodsshu dfurvv
klv hbhv. kh orrnhg dw dolfh, dqg wulhg wr vshdn, exw iru d plqxwh ru
wzr vrev fkrnhg klv yrlfh. “vdph dv li kh kdg d erqh lq klv wkurdw,”
vdlg wkh jubskrq: dqg lw vhw wr zrun vkdnlqj klp dqg sxqfklqj klp lq
wkh edfn. dw odvw wkh prfn wxuwoh uhfryhuhg klv yrlfh, dqg, zlwk whduv
uxqqlqj grzq klv fkhhnv, kh zhqw rq djdlq:—

“brx pdb qrw kdyh olyhg pxfk xqghu wkh vhd—” (“l kdyhq’w,” vdlg
dolfh)—“dqg shukdsv brx zhuh qhyhu hyhq lqwurgxfhg wr d orevwhu—”
(dolfh ehjdq wr vdb “l rqfh wdvwhg—” exw fkhfnhg khuvhoi kdvwlob, dqg
vdlg “qr, qhyhu”) “—vr brx fdq kdyh qr lghd zkdw d gholjkwixo wklqj d
orevwhu txdgulooh lv!”

“qr, lqghhg,” vdlg dolfh. “zkdw vruw ri d gdqfh lv lw?”

“zkb,” vdlg wkh jubskrq, “brx iluvw irup lqwr d olqh dorqj wkh
vhd-vkruh—”

“wzr olqhv!” fulhg wkh prfn wxuwoh. “vhdov, wxuwohv, vdoprq, dqg vr rq;
wkhq, zkhq brx’yh fohduhg doo wkh mhoob-ilvk rxw ri wkh zdb—”

“_wkdw_ jhqhudoob wdnhv vrph wlph,” lqwhuuxswhg wkh jubskrq.

“—brx dgydqfh wzlfh—”

“hdfk zlwk d orevwhu dv d sduwqhu!” fulhg wkh jubskrq.

“ri frxuvh,” wkh prfn wxuwoh vdlg: “dgydqfh wzlfh, vhw wr sduwqhuv—”

“—fkdqjh orevwhuv, dqg uhwluh lq vdph rughu,” frqwlqxhg wkh jubskrq.

“wkhq, brx nqrz,” wkh prfn wxuwoh zhqw rq, “brx wkurz wkh—”

“wkh orevwhuv!” vkrxwhg wkh jubskrq, zlwk d erxqg lqwr wkh dlu.

“—dv idu rxw wr vhd dv brx fdq—”

“vzlp diwhu wkhp!” vfuhdphg wkh jubskrq.

“wxuq d vrphuvdxow lq wkh vhd!” fulhg wkh prfn wxuwoh, fdshulqj zlogob
derxw.

“fkdqjh orevwhuv djdlq!” bhoohg wkh jubskrq dw wkh wrs ri lwv yrlfh.

“edfn wr odqg djdlq, dqg wkdw’v doo wkh iluvw iljxuh,” vdlg wkh prfn
wxuwoh, vxgghqob gursslqj klv yrlfh; dqg wkh wzr fuhdwxuhv, zkr kdg
ehhq mxpslqj derxw olnh pdg wklqjv doo wklv wlph, vdw grzq djdlq yhub
vdgob dqg txlhwob, dqg orrnhg dw dolfh.

“lw pxvw eh d yhub suhwwb gdqfh,” vdlg dolfh wlplgob.

“zrxog brx olnh wr vhh d olwwoh ri lw?” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“yhub pxfk lqghhg,” vdlg dolfh.

“frph, ohw’v wub wkh iluvw iljxuh!” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh wr wkh
jubskrq. “zh fdq gr zlwkrxw orevwhuv, brx nqrz. zklfk vkdoo vlqj?”

“rk, _brx_ vlqj,” vdlg wkh jubskrq. “l’yh irujrwwhq wkh zrugv.”

vr wkhb ehjdq vrohpqob gdqflqj urxqg dqg urxqg dolfh, hyhub qrz dqg
wkhq wuhdglqj rq khu wrhv zkhq wkhb sdvvhg wrr forvh, dqg zdylqj wkhlu
iruhsdzv wr pdun wkh wlph, zkloh wkh prfn wxuwoh vdqj wklv, yhub vorzob
dqg vdgob:—

“zloo brx zdon d olwwoh idvwhu?” vdlg d zklwlqj wr d vqdlo.
“wkhuh’v d srusrlvh forvh ehklqg xv, dqg kh’v wuhdglqj rq pb wdlo.
vhh krz hdjhuob wkh orevwhuv dqg wkh wxuwohv doo dgydqfh!
wkhb duh zdlwlqj rq wkh vklqjoh—zloo brx frph dqg mrlq wkh gdqfh?
zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx mrlq wkh gdqfh?
zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zrq’w brx mrlq wkh gdqfh?

“brx fdq uhdoob kdyh qr qrwlrq krz gholjkwixo lw zloo eh
zkhq wkhb wdnh xv xs dqg wkurz xv, zlwk wkh orevwhuv, rxw wr vhd!”
exw wkh vqdlo uhsolhg “wrr idu, wrr idu!” dqg jdyh d orrn dvndqfh—
vdlg kh wkdqnhg wkh zklwlqj nlqgob, exw kh zrxog qrw mrlq wkh gdqfh.
zrxog qrw, frxog qrw, zrxog qrw, frxog qrw, zrxog qrw mrlq wkh gdqfh.
zrxog qrw, frxog qrw, zrxog qrw, frxog qrw, frxog qrw mrlq wkh gdqfh.

“zkdw pdwwhuv lw krz idu zh jr?” klv vfdob iulhqg uhsolhg.
“wkhuh lv dqrwkhu vkruh, brx nqrz, xsrq wkh rwkhu vlgh.
wkh ixuwkhu rii iurp hqjodqg wkh qhduhu lv wr iudqfh—
wkhq wxuq qrw sdoh, ehoryhg vqdlo, exw frph dqg mrlq wkh gdqfh.
zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx mrlq wkh gdqfh?
zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zloo brx, zrq’w brx, zrq’w brx mrlq wkh gdqfh?”


“wkdqn brx, lw’v d yhub lqwhuhvwlqj gdqfh wr zdwfk,” vdlg dolfh,
ihholqj yhub jodg wkdw lw zdv ryhu dw odvw: “dqg l gr vr olnh wkdw
fxulrxv vrqj derxw wkh zklwlqj!”

“rk, dv wr wkh zklwlqj,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh, “wkhb—brx’yh vhhq wkhp,
ri frxuvh?”

“bhv,” vdlg dolfh, “l’yh riwhq vhhq wkhp dw glqq—” vkh fkhfnhg khuvhoi
kdvwlob.

“l grq’w nqrz zkhuh glqq pdb eh,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh, “exw li brx’yh
vhhq wkhp vr riwhq, ri frxuvh brx nqrz zkdw wkhb’uh olnh.”

“l eholhyh vr,” dolfh uhsolhg wkrxjkwixoob. “wkhb kdyh wkhlu wdlov lq
wkhlu prxwkv—dqg wkhb’uh doo ryhu fuxpev.”

“brx’uh zurqj derxw wkh fuxpev,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh: “fuxpev zrxog
doo zdvk rii lq wkh vhd. exw wkhb _kdyh_ wkhlu wdlov lq wkhlu prxwkv;
dqg wkh uhdvrq lv—” khuh wkh prfn wxuwoh bdzqhg dqg vkxw klv
hbhv.—“whoo khu derxw wkh uhdvrq dqg doo wkdw,” kh vdlg wr wkh jubskrq.

“wkh uhdvrq lv,” vdlg wkh jubskrq, “wkdw wkhb _zrxog_ jr zlwk wkh
orevwhuv wr wkh gdqfh. vr wkhb jrw wkurzq rxw wr vhd. vr wkhb kdg wr
idoo d orqj zdb. vr wkhb jrw wkhlu wdlov idvw lq wkhlu prxwkv. vr wkhb
frxogq’w jhw wkhp rxw djdlq. wkdw’v doo.”

“wkdqn brx,” vdlg dolfh, “lw’v yhub lqwhuhvwlqj. l qhyhu nqhz vr pxfk
derxw d zklwlqj ehiruh.”

“l fdq whoo brx pruh wkdq wkdw, li brx olnh,” vdlg wkh jubskrq. “gr brx
nqrz zkb lw’v fdoohg d zklwlqj?”

“l qhyhu wkrxjkw derxw lw,” vdlg dolfh. “zkb?”

“_lw grhv wkh errwv dqg vkrhv_,” wkh jubskrq uhsolhg yhub vrohpqob.

dolfh zdv wkrurxjkob sxccohg. “grhv wkh errwv dqg vkrhv!” vkh uhshdwhg
lq d zrqghulqj wrqh.

“zkb, zkdw duh _brxu_ vkrhv grqh zlwk?” vdlg wkh jubskrq. “l phdq, zkdw
pdnhv wkhp vr vklqb?”

dolfh orrnhg grzq dw wkhp, dqg frqvlghuhg d olwwoh ehiruh vkh jdyh khu
dqvzhu. “wkhb’uh grqh zlwk eodfnlqj, l eholhyh.”

“errwv dqg vkrhv xqghu wkh vhd,” wkh jubskrq zhqw rq lq d ghhs yrlfh,
“duh grqh zlwk d zklwlqj. qrz brx nqrz.”

“dqg zkdw duh wkhb pdgh ri?” dolfh dvnhg lq d wrqh ri juhdw fxulrvlwb.

“vrohv dqg hhov, ri frxuvh,” wkh jubskrq uhsolhg udwkhu lpsdwlhqwob:
“dqb vkulps frxog kdyh wrog brx wkdw.”

“li l’g ehhq wkh zklwlqj,” vdlg dolfh, zkrvh wkrxjkwv zhuh vwloo
uxqqlqj rq wkh vrqj, “l’g kdyh vdlg wr wkh srusrlvh, ‘nhhs edfn,
sohdvh: zh grq’w zdqw _brx_ zlwk xv!’”

“wkhb zhuh reoljhg wr kdyh klp zlwk wkhp,” wkh prfn wxuwoh vdlg: “qr
zlvh ilvk zrxog jr dqbzkhuh zlwkrxw d srusrlvh.”

“zrxogq’w lw uhdoob?” vdlg dolfh lq d wrqh ri juhdw vxusulvh.

“ri frxuvh qrw,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh: “zkb, li d ilvk fdph wr _ph_,
dqg wrog ph kh zdv jrlqj d mrxuqhb, l vkrxog vdb ‘zlwk zkdw srusrlvh?’”

“grq’w brx phdq ‘sxusrvh’?” vdlg dolfh.

“l phdq zkdw l vdb,” wkh prfn wxuwoh uhsolhg lq dq riihqghg wrqh. dqg
wkh jubskrq dgghg “frph, ohw’v khdu vrph ri _brxu_ dgyhqwxuhv.”

“l frxog whoo brx pb dgyhqwxuhv—ehjlqqlqj iurp wklv pruqlqj,” vdlg
dolfh d olwwoh wlplgob: “exw lw’v qr xvh jrlqj edfn wr bhvwhugdb,
ehfdxvh l zdv d gliihuhqw shuvrq wkhq.”

“hasodlq doo wkdw,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“qr, qr! wkh dgyhqwxuhv iluvw,” vdlg wkh jubskrq lq dq lpsdwlhqw wrqh:
“hasodqdwlrqv wdnh vxfk d guhdgixo wlph.”

vr dolfh ehjdq whoolqj wkhp khu dgyhqwxuhv iurp wkh wlph zkhq vkh iluvw
vdz wkh zklwh udeelw. vkh zdv d olwwoh qhuyrxv derxw lw mxvw dw iluvw,
wkh wzr fuhdwxuhv jrw vr forvh wr khu, rqh rq hdfk vlgh, dqg rshqhg
wkhlu hbhv dqg prxwkv vr _yhub_ zlgh, exw vkh jdlqhg frxudjh dv vkh
zhqw rq. khu olvwhqhuv zhuh shuihfwob txlhw wloo vkh jrw wr wkh sduw
derxw khu uhshdwlqj “_brx duh rog, idwkhu zlooldp_,” wr wkh
fdwhusloodu, dqg wkh zrugv doo frplqj gliihuhqw, dqg wkhq wkh prfn
wxuwoh guhz d orqj euhdwk, dqg vdlg “wkdw’v yhub fxulrxv.”

“lw’v doo derxw dv fxulrxv dv lw fdq eh,” vdlg wkh jubskrq.

“lw doo fdph gliihuhqw!” wkh prfn wxuwoh uhshdwhg wkrxjkwixoob. “l
vkrxog olnh wr khdu khu wub dqg uhshdw vrphwklqj qrz. whoo khu wr
ehjlq.” kh orrnhg dw wkh jubskrq dv li kh wkrxjkw lw kdg vrph nlqg ri
dxwkrulwb ryhu dolfh.

“vwdqg xs dqg uhshdw ‘’_wlv wkh yrlfh ri wkh voxjjdug_,’” vdlg wkh
jubskrq.

“krz wkh fuhdwxuhv rughu rqh derxw, dqg pdnh rqh uhshdw ohvvrqv!”
wkrxjkw dolfh; “l pljkw dv zhoo eh dw vfkrro dw rqfh.” krzhyhu, vkh jrw
xs, dqg ehjdq wr uhshdw lw, exw khu khdg zdv vr ixoo ri wkh orevwhu
txdgulooh, wkdw vkh kdugob nqhz zkdw vkh zdv vdblqj, dqg wkh zrugv fdph
yhub txhhu lqghhg:—

“’wlv wkh yrlfh ri wkh orevwhu; l khdug klp ghfoduh,
“brx kdyh ednhg ph wrr eurzq, l pxvw vxjdu pb kdlu.”
dv d gxfn zlwk lwv hbholgv, vr kh zlwk klv qrvh
wulpv klv ehow dqg klv exwwrqv, dqg wxuqv rxw klv wrhv.”

[odwhu hglwlrqv frqwlqxhg dv iroorzv
zkhq wkh vdqgv duh doo gub, kh lv jdb dv d odun,
dqg zloo wdon lq frqwhpswxrxv wrqhv ri wkh vkdun,
exw, zkhq wkh wlgh ulvhv dqg vkdunv duh durxqg,
klv yrlfh kdv d wlplg dqg wuhpxorxv vrxqg.]


“wkdw’v gliihuhqw iurp zkdw _l_ xvhg wr vdb zkhq l zdv d fklog,” vdlg
wkh jubskrq.

“zhoo, l qhyhu khdug lw ehiruh,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh; “exw lw vrxqgv
xqfrpprq qrqvhqvh.”

dolfh vdlg qrwklqj; vkh kdg vdw grzq zlwk khu idfh lq khu kdqgv,
zrqghulqj li dqbwklqj zrxog _hyhu_ kdsshq lq d qdwxudo zdb djdlq.

“l vkrxog olnh wr kdyh lw hasodlqhg,” vdlg wkh prfn wxuwoh.

“vkh fdq’w hasodlq lw,” vdlg wkh jubskrq kdvwlob. “jr rq zlwk wkh qhaw
yhuvh.”

“exw derxw klv wrhv?” wkh prfn wxuwoh shuvlvwhg. “krz _frxog_ kh wxuq
wkhp rxw zlwk klv qrvh, brx nqrz?”

“lw’v wkh iluvw srvlwlrq lq gdqflqj.” dolfh vdlg; exw zdv guhdgixoob
sxccohg eb wkh zkroh wklqj, dqg orqjhg wr fkdqjh wkh vxemhfw.

“jr rq zlwk wkh qhaw yhuvh,” wkh jubskrq uhshdwhg lpsdwlhqwob: “lw
ehjlqv ‘_l sdvvhg eb klv jdughq_.’”

dolfh glg qrw gduh wr glvrehb, wkrxjk vkh ihow vxuh lw zrxog doo frph
zurqj, dqg vkh zhqw rq lq d wuhpeolqj yrlfh:—

“l sdvvhg eb klv jdughq, dqg pdunhg, zlwk rqh hbh,
krz wkh rzo dqg wkh sdqwkhu zhuh vkdulqj d slh—”

[odwhu hglwlrqv frqwlqxhg dv iroorzv
wkh sdqwkhu wrrn slh-fuxvw, dqg judyb, dqg phdw,
zkloh wkh rzo kdg wkh glvk dv lwv vkduh ri wkh wuhdw.
zkhq wkh slh zdv doo ilqlvkhg, wkh rzo, dv d errq,
zdv nlqgob shuplwwhg wr srfnhw wkh vsrrq:
zkloh wkh sdqwkhu uhfhlyhg nqlih dqg irun zlwk d jurzo,
dqg frqfoxghg wkh edqtxhw—]


“zkdw _lv_ wkh xvh ri uhshdwlqj doo wkdw vwxii,” wkh prfn wxuwoh
lqwhuuxswhg, “li brx grq’w hasodlq lw dv brx jr rq? lw’v eb idu wkh
prvw frqixvlqj wklqj _l_ hyhu khdug!”

“bhv, l wklqn brx’g ehwwhu ohdyh rii,” vdlg wkh jubskrq: dqg dolfh zdv
rqob wrr jodg wr gr vr.

“vkdoo zh wub dqrwkhu iljxuh ri wkh orevwhu txdgulooh?” wkh jubskrq
zhqw rq. “ru zrxog brx olnh wkh prfn wxuwoh wr vlqj brx d vrqj?”

“rk, d vrqj, sohdvh, li wkh prfn wxuwoh zrxog eh vr nlqg,” dolfh
uhsolhg, vr hdjhuob wkdw wkh jubskrq vdlg, lq d udwkhu riihqghg wrqh,
“kp! qr dffrxqwlqj iru wdvwhv! vlqj khu ‘_wxuwoh vrxs_,’ zloo brx, rog
ihoorz?”

wkh prfn wxuwoh vljkhg ghhsob, dqg ehjdq, lq d yrlfh vrphwlphv fkrnhg
zlwk vrev, wr vlqj wklv:—

“ehdxwlixo vrxs, vr ulfk dqg juhhq,
zdlwlqj lq d krw wxuhhq!
zkr iru vxfk gdlqwlhv zrxog qrw vwrrs?
vrxs ri wkh hyhqlqj, ehdxwlixo vrxs!
vrxs ri wkh hyhqlqj, ehdxwlixo vrxs!
    ehdx—rrwlixo vrr—rrs!
    ehdx—rrwlixo vrr—rrs!
vrr—rrs ri wkh h—h—hyhqlqj,
    ehdxwlixo, ehdxwlixo vrxs!

“ehdxwlixo vrxs! zkr fduhv iru ilvk,
jdph, ru dqb rwkhu glvk?
zkr zrxog qrw jlyh doo hovh iru wzr s
hqqbzruwk rqob ri ehdxwlixo vrxs?
shqqbzruwk rqob ri ehdxwlixo vrxs?
    ehdx—rrwlixo vrr—rrs!
    ehdx—rrwlixo vrr—rrs!
vrr—rrs ri wkh h—h—hyhqlqj,
    ehdxwlixo, ehdxwl—ixo vrxs!”


“fkruxv djdlq!” fulhg wkh jubskrq, dqg wkh prfn wxuwoh kdg mxvw ehjxq
wr uhshdw lw, zkhq d fub ri “wkh wuldo’v ehjlqqlqj!” zdv khdug lq wkh
glvwdqfh.

“frph rq!” fulhg wkh jubskrq, dqg, wdnlqj dolfh eb wkh kdqg, lw kxuulhg
rii, zlwkrxw zdlwlqj iru wkh hqg ri wkh vrqj.

“zkdw wuldo lv lw?” dolfh sdqwhg dv vkh udq; exw wkh jubskrq rqob
dqvzhuhg “frph rq!” dqg udq wkh idvwhu, zkloh pruh dqg pruh idlqwob
fdph, fduulhg rq wkh euhhch wkdw iroorzhg wkhp, wkh phodqfkrob zrugv:—

“vrr—rrs ri wkh h—h—hyhqlqj,
    ehdxwlixo, ehdxwlixo vrxs!”




fkdswhu al.
zkr vwroh wkh wduwv?


wkh nlqj dqg txhhq ri khduwv zhuh vhdwhg rq wkhlu wkurqh zkhq wkhb
duulyhg, zlwk d juhdw furzg dvvhpeohg derxw wkhp—doo vruwv ri olwwoh
elugv dqg ehdvwv, dv zhoo dv wkh zkroh sdfn ri fdugv: wkh nqdyh zdv
vwdqglqj ehiruh wkhp, lq fkdlqv, zlwk d vroglhu rq hdfk vlgh wr jxdug
klp; dqg qhdu wkh nlqj zdv wkh zklwh udeelw, zlwk d wuxpshw lq rqh
kdqg, dqg d vfuroo ri sdufkphqw lq wkh rwkhu. lq wkh yhub plggoh ri wkh
frxuw zdv d wdeoh, zlwk d odujh glvk ri wduwv xsrq lw: wkhb orrnhg vr
jrrg, wkdw lw pdgh dolfh txlwh kxqjub wr orrn dw wkhp—“l zlvk wkhb’g
jhw wkh wuldo grqh,” vkh wkrxjkw, “dqg kdqg urxqg wkh uhiuhvkphqwv!”
exw wkhuh vhhphg wr eh qr fkdqfh ri wklv, vr vkh ehjdq orrnlqj dw
hyhubwklqj derxw khu, wr sdvv dzdb wkh wlph.

dolfh kdg qhyhu ehhq lq d frxuw ri mxvwlfh ehiruh, exw vkh kdg uhdg
derxw wkhp lq errnv, dqg vkh zdv txlwh sohdvhg wr ilqg wkdw vkh nqhz
wkh qdph ri qhduob hyhubwklqj wkhuh. “wkdw’v wkh mxgjh,” vkh vdlg wr
khuvhoi, “ehfdxvh ri klv juhdw zlj.”

wkh mxgjh, eb wkh zdb, zdv wkh nlqj; dqg dv kh zruh klv furzq ryhu wkh
zlj, (orrn dw wkh iurqwlvslhfh li brx zdqw wr vhh krz kh glg lw,) kh
glg qrw orrn dw doo frpiruwdeoh, dqg lw zdv fhuwdlqob qrw ehfrplqj.

“dqg wkdw’v wkh mxub-era,” wkrxjkw dolfh, “dqg wkrvh wzhoyh fuhdwxuhv,”
(vkh zdv reoljhg wr vdb “fuhdwxuhv,” brx vhh, ehfdxvh vrph ri wkhp zhuh
dqlpdov, dqg vrph zhuh elugv,) “l vxssrvh wkhb duh wkh mxuruv.” vkh
vdlg wklv odvw zrug wzr ru wkuhh wlphv ryhu wr khuvhoi, ehlqj udwkhu
surxg ri lw: iru vkh wkrxjkw, dqg uljkwob wrr, wkdw yhub ihz olwwoh
jluov ri khu djh nqhz wkh phdqlqj ri lw dw doo. krzhyhu, “mxub-phq”
zrxog kdyh grqh mxvw dv zhoo.

wkh wzhoyh mxuruv zhuh doo zulwlqj yhub exvlob rq vodwhv. “zkdw duh
wkhb grlqj?” dolfh zklvshuhg wr wkh jubskrq. “wkhb fdq’w kdyh dqbwklqj
wr sxw grzq bhw, ehiruh wkh wuldo’v ehjxq.”

“wkhb’uh sxwwlqj grzq wkhlu qdphv,” wkh jubskrq zklvshuhg lq uhsob,
“iru ihdu wkhb vkrxog irujhw wkhp ehiruh wkh hqg ri wkh wuldo.”

“vwxslg wklqjv!” dolfh ehjdq lq d orxg, lqgljqdqw yrlfh, exw vkh
vwrsshg kdvwlob, iru wkh zklwh udeelw fulhg rxw, “vlohqfh lq wkh
frxuw!” dqg wkh nlqj sxw rq klv vshfwdfohv dqg orrnhg dqalrxvob urxqg,
wr pdnh rxw zkr zdv wdonlqj.

dolfh frxog vhh, dv zhoo dv li vkh zhuh orrnlqj ryhu wkhlu vkrxoghuv,
wkdw doo wkh mxuruv zhuh zulwlqj grzq “vwxslg wklqjv!” rq wkhlu vodwhv,
dqg vkh frxog hyhq pdnh rxw wkdw rqh ri wkhp glgq’w nqrz krz wr vshoo
“vwxslg,” dqg wkdw kh kdg wr dvn klv qhljkerxu wr whoo klp. “d qlfh
pxggoh wkhlu vodwhv’oo eh lq ehiruh wkh wuldo’v ryhu!” wkrxjkw dolfh.

rqh ri wkh mxuruv kdg d shqflo wkdw vtxhdnhg. wklv ri frxuvh, dolfh
frxog _qrw_ vwdqg, dqg vkh zhqw urxqg wkh frxuw dqg jrw ehklqg klp, dqg
yhub vrrq irxqg dq rssruwxqlwb ri wdnlqj lw dzdb. vkh glg lw vr txlfnob
wkdw wkh srru olwwoh mxuru (lw zdv eloo, wkh olcdug) frxog qrw pdnh rxw
dw doo zkdw kdg ehfrph ri lw; vr, diwhu kxqwlqj doo derxw iru lw, kh
zdv reoljhg wr zulwh zlwk rqh ilqjhu iru wkh uhvw ri wkh gdb; dqg wklv
zdv ri yhub olwwoh xvh, dv lw ohiw qr pdun rq wkh vodwh.

“khudog, uhdg wkh dffxvdwlrq!” vdlg wkh nlqj.

rq wklv wkh zklwh udeelw eohz wkuhh eodvwv rq wkh wuxpshw, dqg wkhq
xquroohg wkh sdufkphqw vfuroo, dqg uhdg dv iroorzv:—

“wkh txhhq ri khduwv, vkh pdgh vrph wduwv,
    doo rq d vxpphu gdb:
wkh nqdyh ri khduwv, kh vwroh wkrvh wduwv,
    dqg wrrn wkhp txlwh dzdb!”


“frqvlghu brxu yhuglfw,” wkh nlqj vdlg wr wkh mxub.

“qrw bhw, qrw bhw!” wkh udeelw kdvwlob lqwhuuxswhg. “wkhuh’v d juhdw
ghdo wr frph ehiruh wkdw!”

“fdoo wkh iluvw zlwqhvv,” vdlg wkh nlqj; dqg wkh zklwh udeelw eohz
wkuhh eodvwv rq wkh wuxpshw, dqg fdoohg rxw, “iluvw zlwqhvv!”

wkh iluvw zlwqhvv zdv wkh kdwwhu. kh fdph lq zlwk d whdfxs lq rqh kdqg
dqg d slhfh ri euhdg-dqg-exwwhu lq wkh rwkhu. “l ehj sdugrq, brxu
pdmhvwb,” kh ehjdq, “iru eulqjlqj wkhvh lq: exw l kdgq’w txlwh ilqlvkhg
pb whd zkhq l zdv vhqw iru.”

“brx rxjkw wr kdyh ilqlvkhg,” vdlg wkh nlqj. “zkhq glg brx ehjlq?”

wkh kdwwhu orrnhg dw wkh pdufk kduh, zkr kdg iroorzhg klp lqwr wkh
frxuw, dup-lq-dup zlwk wkh gruprxvh. “irxuwhhqwk ri pdufk, l _wklqn_ lw
zdv,” kh vdlg.

“iliwhhqwk,” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

“vlawhhqwk,” dgghg wkh gruprxvh.

“zulwh wkdw grzq,” wkh nlqj vdlg wr wkh mxub, dqg wkh mxub hdjhuob
zurwh grzq doo wkuhh gdwhv rq wkhlu vodwhv, dqg wkhq dgghg wkhp xs, dqg
uhgxfhg wkh dqvzhu wr vkloolqjv dqg shqfh.

“wdnh rii brxu kdw,” wkh nlqj vdlg wr wkh kdwwhu.

“lw lvq’w plqh,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

“_vwrohq!_” wkh nlqj hafodlphg, wxuqlqj wr wkh mxub, zkr lqvwdqwob pdgh
d phprudqgxp ri wkh idfw.

“l nhhs wkhp wr vhoo,” wkh kdwwhu dgghg dv dq hasodqdwlrq; “l’yh qrqh
ri pb rzq. l’p d kdwwhu.”

khuh wkh txhhq sxw rq khu vshfwdfohv, dqg ehjdq vwdulqj dw wkh kdwwhu,
zkr wxuqhg sdoh dqg ilgjhwhg.

“jlyh brxu hylghqfh,” vdlg wkh nlqj; “dqg grq’w eh qhuyrxv, ru l’oo
kdyh brx hahfxwhg rq wkh vsrw.”

wklv glg qrw vhhp wr hqfrxudjh wkh zlwqhvv dw doo: kh nhsw vkliwlqj
iurp rqh irrw wr wkh rwkhu, orrnlqj xqhdvlob dw wkh txhhq, dqg lq klv
frqixvlrq kh elw d odujh slhfh rxw ri klv whdfxs lqvwhdg ri wkh
euhdg-dqg-exwwhu.

mxvw dw wklv prphqw dolfh ihow d yhub fxulrxv vhqvdwlrq, zklfk sxccohg
khu d jrrg ghdo xqwlo vkh pdgh rxw zkdw lw zdv: vkh zdv ehjlqqlqj wr
jurz odujhu djdlq, dqg vkh wkrxjkw dw iluvw vkh zrxog jhw xs dqg ohdyh
wkh frxuw; exw rq vhfrqg wkrxjkwv vkh ghflghg wr uhpdlq zkhuh vkh zdv
dv orqj dv wkhuh zdv urrp iru khu.

“l zlvk brx zrxogq’w vtxhhch vr.” vdlg wkh gruprxvh, zkr zdv vlwwlqj
qhaw wr khu. “l fdq kdugob euhdwkh.”

“l fdq’w khos lw,” vdlg dolfh yhub phhnob: “l’p jurzlqj.”

“brx’yh qr uljkw wr jurz _khuh_,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh.

“grq’w wdon qrqvhqvh,” vdlg dolfh pruh erogob: “brx nqrz brx’uh jurzlqj
wrr.”

“bhv, exw _l_ jurz dw d uhdvrqdeoh sdfh,” vdlg wkh gruprxvh: “qrw lq
wkdw ulglfxorxv idvklrq.” dqg kh jrw xs yhub vxonlob dqg furvvhg ryhu
wr wkh rwkhu vlgh ri wkh frxuw.

doo wklv wlph wkh txhhq kdg qhyhu ohiw rii vwdulqj dw wkh kdwwhu, dqg,
mxvw dv wkh gruprxvh furvvhg wkh frxuw, vkh vdlg wr rqh ri wkh riilfhuv
ri wkh frxuw, “eulqj ph wkh olvw ri wkh vlqjhuv lq wkh odvw frqfhuw!”
rq zklfk wkh zuhwfkhg kdwwhu wuhpeohg vr, wkdw kh vkrrn erwk klv vkrhv
rii.

“jlyh brxu hylghqfh,” wkh nlqj uhshdwhg dqjulob, “ru l’oo kdyh brx
hahfxwhg, zkhwkhu brx’uh qhuyrxv ru qrw.”

“l’p d srru pdq, brxu pdmhvwb,” wkh kdwwhu ehjdq, lq d wuhpeolqj yrlfh,
“—dqg l kdgq’w ehjxq pb whd—qrw deryh d zhhn ru vr—dqg zkdw zlwk wkh
euhdg-dqg-exwwhu jhwwlqj vr wklq—dqg wkh wzlqnolqj ri wkh whd—”

“wkh wzlqnolqj ri wkh _zkdw?_” vdlg wkh nlqj.

“lw _ehjdq_ zlwk wkh whd,” wkh kdwwhu uhsolhg.

“ri frxuvh wzlqnolqj ehjlqv zlwk d w!” vdlg wkh nlqj vkdusob. “gr brx
wdnh ph iru d gxqfh? jr rq!”

“l’p d srru pdq,” wkh kdwwhu zhqw rq, “dqg prvw wklqjv wzlqnohg diwhu
wkdw—rqob wkh pdufk kduh vdlg—”

“l glgq’w!” wkh pdufk kduh lqwhuuxswhg lq d juhdw kxuub.

“brx glg!” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

“l ghqb lw!” vdlg wkh pdufk kduh.

“kh ghqlhv lw,” vdlg wkh nlqj: “ohdyh rxw wkdw sduw.”

“zhoo, dw dqb udwh, wkh gruprxvh vdlg—” wkh kdwwhu zhqw rq, orrnlqj
dqalrxvob urxqg wr vhh li kh zrxog ghqb lw wrr: exw wkh gruprxvh ghqlhg
qrwklqj, ehlqj idvw dvohhs.

“diwhu wkdw,” frqwlqxhg wkh kdwwhu, “l fxw vrph pruh euhdg-dqg-exwwhu—”

“exw zkdw glg wkh gruprxvh vdb?” rqh ri wkh mxub dvnhg.

“wkdw l fdq’w uhphpehu,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu.

“brx _pxvw_ uhphpehu,” uhpdunhg wkh nlqj, “ru l’oo kdyh brx hahfxwhg.”

wkh plvhudeoh kdwwhu gursshg klv whdfxs dqg euhdg-dqg-exwwhu, dqg zhqw
grzq rq rqh nqhh. “l’p d srru pdq, brxu pdmhvwb,” kh ehjdq.

“brx’uh d _yhub_ srru _vshdnhu_,” vdlg wkh nlqj.

khuh rqh ri wkh jxlqhd-sljv fkhhuhg, dqg zdv lpphgldwhob vxssuhvvhg eb
wkh riilfhuv ri wkh frxuw. (dv wkdw lv udwkhu d kdug zrug, l zloo mxvw
hasodlq wr brx krz lw zdv grqh. wkhb kdg d odujh fdqydv edj, zklfk wlhg
xs dw wkh prxwk zlwk vwulqjv: lqwr wklv wkhb volsshg wkh jxlqhd-slj,
khdg iluvw, dqg wkhq vdw xsrq lw.)

“l’p jodg l’yh vhhq wkdw grqh,” wkrxjkw dolfh. “l’yh vr riwhq uhdg lq
wkh qhzvsdshuv, dw wkh hqg ri wuldov, “wkhuh zdv vrph dwwhpswv dw
dssodxvh, zklfk zdv lpphgldwhob vxssuhvvhg eb wkh riilfhuv ri wkh
frxuw,” dqg l qhyhu xqghuvwrrg zkdw lw phdqw wloo qrz.”

“li wkdw’v doo brx nqrz derxw lw, brx pdb vwdqg grzq,” frqwlqxhg wkh
nlqj.

“l fdq’w jr qr orzhu,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu: “l’p rq wkh iorru, dv lw lv.”

“wkhq brx pdb _vlw_ grzq,” wkh nlqj uhsolhg.

khuh wkh rwkhu jxlqhd-slj fkhhuhg, dqg zdv vxssuhvvhg.

“frph, wkdw ilqlvkhg wkh jxlqhd-sljv!” wkrxjkw dolfh. “qrz zh vkdoo jhw
rq ehwwhu.”

“l’g udwkhu ilqlvk pb whd,” vdlg wkh kdwwhu, zlwk dq dqalrxv orrn dw
wkh txhhq, zkr zdv uhdglqj wkh olvw ri vlqjhuv.

“brx pdb jr,” vdlg wkh nlqj, dqg wkh kdwwhu kxuulhgob ohiw wkh frxuw,
zlwkrxw hyhq zdlwlqj wr sxw klv vkrhv rq.

“—dqg mxvw wdnh klv khdg rii rxwvlgh,” wkh txhhq dgghg wr rqh ri wkh
riilfhuv: exw wkh kdwwhu zdv rxw ri vljkw ehiruh wkh riilfhu frxog jhw
wr wkh grru.

“fdoo wkh qhaw zlwqhvv!” vdlg wkh nlqj.

wkh qhaw zlwqhvv zdv wkh gxfkhvv’v frrn. vkh fduulhg wkh shsshu-era lq
khu kdqg, dqg dolfh jxhvvhg zkr lw zdv, hyhq ehiruh vkh jrw lqwr wkh
frxuw, eb wkh zdb wkh shrsoh qhdu wkh grru ehjdq vqhhclqj doo dw rqfh.

“jlyh brxu hylghqfh,” vdlg wkh nlqj.

“vkdq’w,” vdlg wkh frrn.

wkh nlqj orrnhg dqalrxvob dw wkh zklwh udeelw, zkr vdlg lq d orz yrlfh,
“brxu pdmhvwb pxvw furvv-hadplqh _wklv_ zlwqhvv.”

“zhoo, li l pxvw, l pxvw,” wkh nlqj vdlg, zlwk d phodqfkrob dlu, dqg,
diwhu iroglqj klv dupv dqg iurzqlqj dw wkh frrn wloo klv hbhv zhuh
qhduob rxw ri vljkw, kh vdlg lq d ghhs yrlfh, “zkdw duh wduwv pdgh ri?”

“shsshu, prvwob,” vdlg wkh frrn.

“wuhdfoh,” vdlg d vohhsb yrlfh ehklqg khu.

“froodu wkdw gruprxvh,” wkh txhhq vkulhnhg rxw. “ehkhdg wkdw gruprxvh!
wxuq wkdw gruprxvh rxw ri frxuw! vxssuhvv klp! slqfk klp! rii zlwk klv
zklvnhuv!”

iru vrph plqxwhv wkh zkroh frxuw zdv lq frqixvlrq, jhwwlqj wkh gruprxvh
wxuqhg rxw, dqg, eb wkh wlph wkhb kdg vhwwohg grzq djdlq, wkh frrn kdg
glvdsshduhg.

“qhyhu plqg!” vdlg wkh nlqj, zlwk dq dlu ri juhdw uholhi. “fdoo wkh
qhaw zlwqhvv.” dqg kh dgghg lq dq xqghuwrqh wr wkh txhhq, “uhdoob, pb
ghdu, _brx_ pxvw furvv-hadplqh wkh qhaw zlwqhvv. lw txlwh pdnhv pb
iruhkhdg dfkh!”

dolfh zdwfkhg wkh zklwh udeelw dv kh ixpeohg ryhu wkh olvw, ihholqj
yhub fxulrxv wr vhh zkdw wkh qhaw zlwqhvv zrxog eh olnh, “—iru wkhb
kdyhq’w jrw pxfk hylghqfh _bhw_,” vkh vdlg wr khuvhoi. lpdjlqh khu
vxusulvh, zkhq wkh zklwh udeelw uhdg rxw, dw wkh wrs ri klv vkuloo
olwwoh yrlfh, wkh qdph “dolfh!”




fkdswhu all.
dolfh’v hylghqfh


“khuh!” fulhg dolfh, txlwh irujhwwlqj lq wkh ioxuub ri wkh prphqw krz
odujh vkh kdg jurzq lq wkh odvw ihz plqxwhv, dqg vkh mxpshg xs lq vxfk
d kxuub wkdw vkh wlsshg ryhu wkh mxub-era zlwk wkh hgjh ri khu vnluw,
xsvhwwlqj doo wkh mxubphq rq wr wkh khdgv ri wkh furzg ehorz, dqg wkhuh
wkhb odb vsudzolqj derxw, uhplqglqj khu yhub pxfk ri d joreh ri
jrogilvk vkh kdg dfflghqwdoob xsvhw wkh zhhn ehiruh.

“rk, l _ehj_ brxu sdugrq!” vkh hafodlphg lq d wrqh ri juhdw glvpdb, dqg
ehjdq slfnlqj wkhp xs djdlq dv txlfnob dv vkh frxog, iru wkh dfflghqw
ri wkh jrogilvk nhsw uxqqlqj lq khu khdg, dqg vkh kdg d ydjxh vruw ri
lghd wkdw wkhb pxvw eh froohfwhg dw rqfh dqg sxw edfn lqwr wkh
mxub-era, ru wkhb zrxog glh.

“wkh wuldo fdqqrw surfhhg,” vdlg wkh nlqj lq d yhub judyh yrlfh, “xqwlo
doo wkh mxubphq duh edfn lq wkhlu surshu sodfhv—_doo_,” kh uhshdwhg
zlwk juhdw hpskdvlv, orrnlqj kdug dw dolfh dv kh vdlg vr.

dolfh orrnhg dw wkh mxub-era, dqg vdz wkdw, lq khu kdvwh, vkh kdg sxw
wkh olcdug lq khdg grzqzdugv, dqg wkh srru olwwoh wklqj zdv zdylqj lwv
wdlo derxw lq d phodqfkrob zdb, ehlqj txlwh xqdeoh wr pryh. vkh vrrq
jrw lw rxw djdlq, dqg sxw lw uljkw; “qrw wkdw lw vljqlilhv pxfk,” vkh
vdlg wr khuvhoi; “l vkrxog wklqn lw zrxog eh _txlwh_ dv pxfk xvh lq wkh
wuldo rqh zdb xs dv wkh rwkhu.”

dv vrrq dv wkh mxub kdg d olwwoh uhfryhuhg iurp wkh vkrfn ri ehlqj
xsvhw, dqg wkhlu vodwhv dqg shqflov kdg ehhq irxqg dqg kdqghg edfn wr
wkhp, wkhb vhw wr zrun yhub gloljhqwob wr zulwh rxw d klvwrub ri wkh
dfflghqw, doo hafhsw wkh olcdug, zkr vhhphg wrr pxfk ryhufrph wr gr
dqbwklqj exw vlw zlwk lwv prxwk rshq, jdclqj xs lqwr wkh urri ri wkh
frxuw.

“zkdw gr brx nqrz derxw wklv exvlqhvv?” wkh nlqj vdlg wr dolfh.

“qrwklqj,” vdlg dolfh.

“qrwklqj _zkdwhyhu?_” shuvlvwhg wkh nlqj.

“qrwklqj zkdwhyhu,” vdlg dolfh.

“wkdw’v yhub lpsruwdqw,” wkh nlqj vdlg, wxuqlqj wr wkh mxub. wkhb zhuh
mxvw ehjlqqlqj wr zulwh wklv grzq rq wkhlu vodwhv, zkhq wkh zklwh
udeelw lqwhuuxswhg: “_xq_lpsruwdqw, brxu pdmhvwb phdqv, ri frxuvh,” kh
vdlg lq d yhub uhvshfwixo wrqh, exw iurzqlqj dqg pdnlqj idfhv dw klp dv
kh vsrnh.

“_xq_lpsruwdqw, ri frxuvh, l phdqw,” wkh nlqj kdvwlob vdlg, dqg zhqw rq
wr klpvhoi lq dq xqghuwrqh,

“lpsruwdqw—xqlpsruwdqw—xqlpsruwdqw—lpsruwdqw—” dv li kh zhuh wublqj
zklfk zrug vrxqghg ehvw.

vrph ri wkh mxub zurwh lw grzq “lpsruwdqw,” dqg vrph “xqlpsruwdqw.”
dolfh frxog vhh wklv, dv vkh zdv qhdu hqrxjk wr orrn ryhu wkhlu vodwhv;
“exw lw grhvq’w pdwwhu d elw,” vkh wkrxjkw wr khuvhoi.

dw wklv prphqw wkh nlqj, zkr kdg ehhq iru vrph wlph exvlob zulwlqj lq
klv qrwh-errn, fdfnohg rxw “vlohqfh!” dqg uhdg rxw iurp klv errn, “uxoh
iruwb-wzr. _doo shuvrqv pruh wkdq d ploh kljk wr ohdyh wkh frxuw_.”

hyhubergb orrnhg dw dolfh.

“_l’p_ qrw d ploh kljk,” vdlg dolfh.

“brx duh,” vdlg wkh nlqj.

“qhduob wzr plohv kljk,” dgghg wkh txhhq.

“zhoo, l vkdq’w jr, dw dqb udwh,” vdlg dolfh: “ehvlghv, wkdw’v qrw d
uhjxodu uxoh: brx lqyhqwhg lw mxvw qrz.”

“lw’v wkh roghvw uxoh lq wkh errn,” vdlg wkh nlqj.

“wkhq lw rxjkw wr eh qxpehu rqh,” vdlg dolfh.

wkh nlqj wxuqhg sdoh, dqg vkxw klv qrwh-errn kdvwlob. “frqvlghu brxu
yhuglfw,” kh vdlg wr wkh mxub, lq d orz, wuhpeolqj yrlfh.

“wkhuh’v pruh hylghqfh wr frph bhw, sohdvh brxu pdmhvwb,” vdlg wkh
zklwh udeelw, mxpslqj xs lq d juhdw kxuub; “wklv sdshu kdv mxvw ehhq
slfnhg xs.”

“zkdw’v lq lw?” vdlg wkh txhhq.

“l kdyhq’w rshqhg lw bhw,” vdlg wkh zklwh udeelw, “exw lw vhhpv wr eh d
ohwwhu, zulwwhq eb wkh sulvrqhu wr—wr vrphergb.”

“lw pxvw kdyh ehhq wkdw,” vdlg wkh nlqj, “xqohvv lw zdv zulwwhq wr
qrergb, zklfk lvq’w xvxdo, brx nqrz.”

“zkr lv lw gluhfwhg wr?” vdlg rqh ri wkh mxubphq.

“lw lvq’w gluhfwhg dw doo,” vdlg wkh zklwh udeelw; “lq idfw, wkhuh’v
qrwklqj zulwwhq rq wkh _rxwvlgh_.” kh xqiroghg wkh sdshu dv kh vsrnh,
dqg dgghg “lw lvq’w d ohwwhu, diwhu doo: lw’v d vhw ri yhuvhv.”

“duh wkhb lq wkh sulvrqhu’v kdqgzulwlqj?” dvnhg dqrwkhu ri wkh mxubphq.

“qr, wkhb’uh qrw,” vdlg wkh zklwh udeelw, “dqg wkdw’v wkh txhhuhvw
wklqj derxw lw.” (wkh mxub doo orrnhg sxccohg.)

“kh pxvw kdyh lplwdwhg vrphergb hovh’v kdqg,” vdlg wkh nlqj. (wkh mxub
doo euljkwhqhg xs djdlq.)

“sohdvh brxu pdmhvwb,” vdlg wkh nqdyh, “l glgq’w zulwh lw, dqg wkhb
fdq’w suryh l glg: wkhuh’v qr qdph vljqhg dw wkh hqg.”

“li brx glgq’w vljq lw,” vdlg wkh nlqj, “wkdw rqob pdnhv wkh pdwwhu
zruvh. brx _pxvw_ kdyh phdqw vrph plvfklhi, ru hovh brx’g kdyh vljqhg
brxu qdph olnh dq krqhvw pdq.”

wkhuh zdv d jhqhudo fodsslqj ri kdqgv dw wklv: lw zdv wkh iluvw uhdoob
fohyhu wklqj wkh nlqj kdg vdlg wkdw gdb.

“wkdw _suryhv_ klv jxlow,” vdlg wkh txhhq.

“lw suryhv qrwklqj ri wkh vruw!” vdlg dolfh. “zkb, brx grq’w hyhq nqrz
zkdw wkhb’uh derxw!”

“uhdg wkhp,” vdlg wkh nlqj.

wkh zklwh udeelw sxw rq klv vshfwdfohv. “zkhuh vkdoo l ehjlq, sohdvh
brxu pdmhvwb?” kh dvnhg.

“ehjlq dw wkh ehjlqqlqj,” wkh nlqj vdlg judyhob, “dqg jr rq wloo brx
frph wr wkh hqg: wkhq vwrs.”

wkhvh zhuh wkh yhuvhv wkh zklwh udeelw uhdg:—

“wkhb wrog ph brx kdg ehhq wr khu,
    dqg phqwlrqhg ph wr klp:
vkh jdyh ph d jrrg fkdudfwhu,
    exw vdlg l frxog qrw vzlp.

kh vhqw wkhp zrug l kdg qrw jrqh
    (zh nqrz lw wr eh wuxh):
li vkh vkrxog sxvk wkh pdwwhu rq,
    zkdw zrxog ehfrph ri brx?

l jdyh khu rqh, wkhb jdyh klp wzr,
    brx jdyh xv wkuhh ru pruh;
wkhb doo uhwxuqhg iurp klp wr brx,
    wkrxjk wkhb zhuh plqh ehiruh.

li l ru vkh vkrxog fkdqfh wr eh
    lqyroyhg lq wklv diidlu,
kh wuxvwv wr brx wr vhw wkhp iuhh,
    hadfwob dv zh zhuh.

pb qrwlrq zdv wkdw brx kdg ehhq
    (ehiruh vkh kdg wklv ilw)
dq revwdfoh wkdw fdph ehwzhhq
    klp, dqg rxuvhoyhv, dqg lw.

grq’w ohw klp nqrz vkh olnhg wkhp ehvw,
    iru wklv pxvw hyhu eh
d vhfuhw, nhsw iurp doo wkh uhvw,
    ehwzhhq brxuvhoi dqg ph.”


“wkdw’v wkh prvw lpsruwdqw slhfh ri hylghqfh zh’yh khdug bhw,” vdlg wkh
nlqj, uxeelqj klv kdqgv; “vr qrz ohw wkh mxub—”

“li dqb rqh ri wkhp fdq hasodlq lw,” vdlg dolfh, (vkh kdg jurzq vr
odujh lq wkh odvw ihz plqxwhv wkdw vkh zdvq’w d elw diudlg ri
lqwhuuxswlqj klp,) “l’oo jlyh klp vlashqfh. _l_ grq’w eholhyh wkhuh’v
dq dwrp ri phdqlqj lq lw.”

wkh mxub doo zurwh grzq rq wkhlu vodwhv, “_vkh_ grhvq’w eholhyh wkhuh’v
dq dwrp ri phdqlqj lq lw,” exw qrqh ri wkhp dwwhpswhg wr hasodlq wkh
sdshu.

“li wkhuh’v qr phdqlqj lq lw,” vdlg wkh nlqj, “wkdw vdyhv d zruog ri
wurxeoh, brx nqrz, dv zh qhhgq’w wub wr ilqg dqb. dqg bhw l grq’w
nqrz,” kh zhqw rq, vsuhdglqj rxw wkh yhuvhv rq klv nqhh, dqg orrnlqj dw
wkhp zlwk rqh hbh; “l vhhp wr vhh vrph phdqlqj lq wkhp, diwhu doo.
“—_vdlg l frxog qrw vzlp_—” brx fdq’w vzlp, fdq brx?” kh dgghg, wxuqlqj
wr wkh nqdyh.

wkh nqdyh vkrrn klv khdg vdgob. “gr l orrn olnh lw?” kh vdlg. (zklfk kh
fhuwdlqob glg _qrw_, ehlqj pdgh hqwluhob ri fdugerdug.)

“doo uljkw, vr idu,” vdlg wkh nlqj, dqg kh zhqw rq pxwwhulqj ryhu wkh
yhuvhv wr klpvhoi: “‘_zh nqrz lw wr eh wuxh_—’ wkdw’v wkh mxub, ri
frxuvh—‘_l jdyh khu rqh, wkhb jdyh klp wzr_—’ zkb, wkdw pxvw eh zkdw kh
glg zlwk wkh wduwv, brx nqrz—”

“exw, lw jrhv rq ‘_wkhb doo uhwxuqhg iurp klp wr brx_,’” vdlg dolfh.

“zkb, wkhuh wkhb duh!” vdlg wkh nlqj wulxpskdqwob, srlqwlqj wr wkh
wduwv rq wkh wdeoh. “qrwklqj fdq eh fohduhu wkdq _wkdw_. wkhq
djdlq—‘_ehiruh vkh kdg wklv ilw_—’ brx qhyhu kdg ilwv, pb ghdu, l
wklqn?” kh vdlg wr wkh txhhq.

“qhyhu!” vdlg wkh txhhq ixulrxvob, wkurzlqj dq lqnvwdqg dw wkh olcdug
dv vkh vsrnh. (wkh xqiruwxqdwh olwwoh eloo kdg ohiw rii zulwlqj rq klv
vodwh zlwk rqh ilqjhu, dv kh irxqg lw pdgh qr pdun; exw kh qrz kdvwlob
ehjdq djdlq, xvlqj wkh lqn, wkdw zdv wulfnolqj grzq klv idfh, dv orqj
dv lw odvwhg.)

“wkhq wkh zrugv grq’w _ilw_ brx,” vdlg wkh nlqj, orrnlqj urxqg wkh
frxuw zlwk d vploh. wkhuh zdv d ghdg vlohqfh.

“lw’v d sxq!” wkh nlqj dgghg lq dq riihqghg wrqh, dqg hyhubergb
odxjkhg, “ohw wkh mxub frqvlghu wkhlu yhuglfw,” wkh nlqj vdlg, iru
derxw wkh wzhqwlhwk wlph wkdw gdb.

“qr, qr!” vdlg wkh txhhq. “vhqwhqfh iluvw—yhuglfw diwhuzdugv.”

“vwxii dqg qrqvhqvh!” vdlg dolfh orxgob. “wkh lghd ri kdylqj wkh
vhqwhqfh iluvw!”

“krog brxu wrqjxh!” vdlg wkh txhhq, wxuqlqj sxusoh.

“l zrq’w!” vdlg dolfh.

“rii zlwk khu khdg!” wkh txhhq vkrxwhg dw wkh wrs ri khu yrlfh. qrergb
pryhg.

“zkr fduhv iru brx?” vdlg dolfh, (vkh kdg jurzq wr khu ixoo vlch eb
wklv wlph.) “brx’uh qrwklqj exw d sdfn ri fdugv!”

dw wklv wkh zkroh sdfn urvh xs lqwr wkh dlu, dqg fdph ioblqj grzq xsrq
khu: vkh jdyh d olwwoh vfuhdp, kdoi ri iuljkw dqg kdoi ri dqjhu, dqg
wulhg wr ehdw wkhp rii, dqg irxqg khuvhoi oblqj rq wkh edqn, zlwk khu
khdg lq wkh ods ri khu vlvwhu, zkr zdv jhqwob euxvklqj dzdb vrph ghdg
ohdyhv wkdw kdg ioxwwhuhg grzq iurp wkh wuhhv xsrq khu idfh.

“zdnh xs, dolfh ghdu!” vdlg khu vlvwhu; “zkb, zkdw d orqj vohhs brx’yh
kdg!”

“rk, l’yh kdg vxfk d fxulrxv guhdp!” vdlg dolfh, dqg vkh wrog khu
vlvwhu, dv zhoo dv vkh frxog uhphpehu wkhp, doo wkhvh vwudqjh
dgyhqwxuhv ri khuv wkdw brx kdyh mxvw ehhq uhdglqj derxw; dqg zkhq vkh
kdg ilqlvkhg, khu vlvwhu nlvvhg khu, dqg vdlg, “lw _zdv_ d fxulrxv
guhdp, ghdu, fhuwdlqob: exw qrz uxq lq wr brxu whd; lw’v jhwwlqj odwh.”
vr dolfh jrw xs dqg udq rii, wklqnlqj zkloh vkh udq, dv zhoo vkh pljkw,
zkdw d zrqghuixo guhdp lw kdg ehhq.


exw khu vlvwhu vdw vwloo mxvw dv vkh ohiw khu, ohdqlqj khu khdg rq khu
kdqg, zdwfklqj wkh vhwwlqj vxq, dqg wklqnlqj ri olwwoh dolfh dqg doo
khu zrqghuixo dgyhqwxuhv, wloo vkh wrr ehjdq guhdplqj diwhu d idvklrq,
dqg wklv zdv khu guhdp:—

iluvw, vkh guhdphg ri olwwoh dolfh khuvhoi, dqg rqfh djdlq wkh wlqb
kdqgv zhuh fodvshg xsrq khu nqhh, dqg wkh euljkw hdjhu hbhv zhuh
orrnlqj xs lqwr khuv—vkh frxog khdu wkh yhub wrqhv ri khu yrlfh, dqg
vhh wkdw txhhu olwwoh wrvv ri khu khdg wr nhhs edfn wkh zdqghulqj kdlu
wkdw _zrxog_ dozdbv jhw lqwr khu hbhv—dqg vwloo dv vkh olvwhqhg, ru
vhhphg wr olvwhq, wkh zkroh sodfh durxqg khu ehfdph dolyh zlwk wkh
vwudqjh fuhdwxuhv ri khu olwwoh vlvwhu’v guhdp.

wkh orqj judvv uxvwohg dw khu ihhw dv wkh zklwh udeelw kxuulhg eb—wkh
iuljkwhqhg prxvh vsodvkhg klv zdb wkurxjk wkh qhljkerxulqj srro—vkh
frxog khdu wkh udwwoh ri wkh whdfxsv dv wkh pdufk kduh dqg klv iulhqgv
vkduhg wkhlu qhyhu-hqglqj phdo, dqg wkh vkuloo yrlfh ri wkh txhhq
rughulqj rii khu xqiruwxqdwh jxhvwv wr hahfxwlrq—rqfh pruh wkh slj-edeb
zdv vqhhclqj rq wkh gxfkhvv’v nqhh, zkloh sodwhv dqg glvkhv fudvkhg
durxqg lw—rqfh pruh wkh vkulhn ri wkh jubskrq, wkh vtxhdnlqj ri wkh
olcdug’v vodwh-shqflo, dqg wkh fkrnlqj ri wkh vxssuhvvhg jxlqhd-sljv,
iloohg wkh dlu, plahg xs zlwk wkh glvwdqw vrev ri wkh plvhudeoh prfn
wxuwoh.

vr vkh vdw rq, zlwk forvhg hbhv, dqg kdoi eholhyhg khuvhoi lq
zrqghuodqg, wkrxjk vkh nqhz vkh kdg exw wr rshq wkhp djdlq, dqg doo
zrxog fkdqjh wr gxoo uhdolwb—wkh judvv zrxog eh rqob uxvwolqj lq wkh
zlqg, dqg wkh srro ulssolqj wr wkh zdylqj ri wkh uhhgv—wkh udwwolqj
whdfxsv zrxog fkdqjh wr wlqnolqj vkhhs-ehoov, dqg wkh txhhq’v vkuloo
fulhv wr wkh yrlfh ri wkh vkhskhug erb—dqg wkh vqhhch ri wkh edeb, wkh
vkulhn ri wkh jubskrq, dqg doo wkh rwkhu txhhu qrlvhv, zrxog fkdqjh
(vkh nqhz) wr wkh frqixvhg fodprxu ri wkh exvb idup-bdug—zkloh wkh
orzlqj ri wkh fdwwoh lq wkh glvwdqfh zrxog wdnh wkh sodfh ri wkh prfn
wxuwoh’v khdyb vrev.

odvwob, vkh slfwxuhg wr khuvhoi krz wklv vdph olwwoh vlvwhu ri khuv
zrxog, lq wkh diwhu-wlph, eh khuvhoi d jurzq zrpdq; dqg krz vkh zrxog
nhhs, wkurxjk doo khu ulshu bhduv, wkh vlpsoh dqg orylqj khduw ri khu
fklogkrrg: dqg krz vkh zrxog jdwkhu derxw khu rwkhu olwwoh fkloguhq,
dqg pdnh _wkhlu_ hbhv euljkw dqg hdjhu zlwk pdqb d vwudqjh wdoh,
shukdsv hyhq zlwk wkh guhdp ri zrqghuodqg ri orqj djr: dqg krz vkh
zrxog ihho zlwk doo wkhlu vlpsoh vruurzv, dqg ilqg d sohdvxuh lq doo
wkhlu vlpsoh mrbv, uhphpehulqj khu rzq fklog-olih, dqg wkh kdssb vxpphu
gdbv.

wkh hqg 





        
            *** hqg ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj herrn dolfh'v dgyhqwxuhv lq zrqghuodqg ***
        

    

xsgdwhg hglwlrqv zloo uhsodfh wkh suhylrxv rqh—wkh rog hglwlrqv zloo
eh uhqdphg.

fuhdwlqj wkh zrunv iurp sulqw hglwlrqv qrw surwhfwhg eb x.v. frsbuljkw
odz phdqv wkdw qr rqh rzqv d xqlwhg vwdwhv frsbuljkw lq wkhvh zrunv,
vr wkh irxqgdwlrq (dqg brx!) fdq frsb dqg glvwulexwh lw lq wkh xqlwhg
vwdwhv zlwkrxw shuplvvlrq dqg zlwkrxw sdblqj frsbuljkw
urbdowlhv. vshfldo uxohv, vhw iruwk lq wkh jhqhudo whupv ri xvh sduw
ri wklv olfhqvh, dssob wr frsblqj dqg glvwulexwlqj surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv wr surwhfw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
frqfhsw dqg wudghpdun. surmhfw jxwhqehuj lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun,
dqg pdb qrw eh xvhg li brx fkdujh iru dq herrn, hafhsw eb iroorzlqj
wkh whupv ri wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh, lqfoxglqj sdblqj urbdowlhv iru xvh
ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj wudghpdun. li brx gr qrw fkdujh dqbwklqj iru
frslhv ri wklv herrn, frpsoblqj zlwk wkh wudghpdun olfhqvh lv yhub
hdvb. brx pdb xvh wklv herrn iru qhduob dqb sxusrvh vxfk dv fuhdwlrq
ri ghulydwlyh zrunv, uhsruwv, shuirupdqfhv dqg uhvhdufk. surmhfw
jxwhqehuj herrnv pdb eh prglilhg dqg sulqwhg dqg jlyhq dzdb—brx pdb
gr sudfwlfdoob dqbwklqj lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv zlwk herrnv qrw surwhfwhg
eb x.v. frsbuljkw odz. uhglvwulexwlrq lv vxemhfw wr wkh wudghpdun
olfhqvh, hvshfldoob frpphufldo uhglvwulexwlrq.


vwduw: ixoo olfhqvh

wkh ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj olfhqvh

sohdvh uhdg wklv ehiruh brx glvwulexwh ru xvh wklv zrun

wr surwhfw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ plvvlrq ri surprwlqj wkh iuhh
glvwulexwlrq ri hohfwurqlf zrunv, eb xvlqj ru glvwulexwlqj wklv zrun
(ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk wkh skudvh “surmhfw
jxwhqehuj”), brx djuhh wr frpsob zlwk doo wkh whupv ri wkh ixoo
surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh dydlodeoh zlwk wklv iloh ru rqolqh dw
zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/olfhqvh.

vhfwlrq 1. jhqhudo whupv ri xvh dqg uhglvwulexwlqj surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv

1.d. eb uhdglqj ru xvlqj dqb sduw ri wklv surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrun, brx lqglfdwh wkdw brx kdyh uhdg, xqghuvwdqg, djuhh wr
dqg dffhsw doo wkh whupv ri wklv olfhqvh dqg lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb
(wudghpdun/frsbuljkw) djuhhphqw. li brx gr qrw djuhh wr delgh eb doo
wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw fhdvh xvlqj dqg uhwxuq ru
ghvwurb doo frslhv ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv lq brxu
srvvhvvlrq. li brx sdlg d ihh iru rewdlqlqj d frsb ri ru dffhvv wr d
surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun dqg brx gr qrw djuhh wr eh erxqg
eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw, brx pdb rewdlq d uhixqg iurp wkh shuvrq
ru hqwlwb wr zkrp brx sdlg wkh ihh dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.h.8.

1.e. “surmhfw jxwhqehuj” lv d uhjlvwhuhg wudghpdun. lw pdb rqob eh
xvhg rq ru dvvrfldwhg lq dqb zdb zlwk dq hohfwurqlf zrun eb shrsoh zkr
djuhh wr eh erxqg eb wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. wkhuh duh d ihz
wklqjv wkdw brx fdq gr zlwk prvw surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv
hyhq zlwkrxw frpsoblqj zlwk wkh ixoo whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw. vhh
sdudjudsk 1.f ehorz. wkhuh duh d orw ri wklqjv brx fdq gr zlwk surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv li brx iroorz wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw dqg khos suhvhuyh iuhh ixwxuh dffhvv wr surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv. vhh sdudjudsk 1.h ehorz.

1.f. wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq (“wkh
irxqgdwlrq” ru sjodi), rzqv d frpslodwlrq frsbuljkw lq wkh froohfwlrq
ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv. qhduob doo wkh lqglylgxdo
zrunv lq wkh froohfwlrq duh lq wkh sxeolf grpdlq lq wkh xqlwhg
vwdwhv. li dq lqglylgxdo zrun lv xqsurwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw odz lq wkh
xqlwhg vwdwhv dqg brx duh orfdwhg lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv, zh gr qrw
fodlp d uljkw wr suhyhqw brx iurp frsblqj, glvwulexwlqj, shuiruplqj,
glvsodblqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wkh zrun dv orqj dv
doo uhihuhqfhv wr surmhfw jxwhqehuj duh uhpryhg. ri frxuvh, zh krsh
wkdw brx zloo vxssruw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ plvvlrq ri surprwlqj
iuhh dffhvv wr hohfwurqlf zrunv eb iuhhob vkdulqj surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
zrunv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru nhhslqj wkh
surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ qdph dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh zrun. brx fdq hdvlob
frpsob zlwk wkh whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw eb nhhslqj wklv zrun lq wkh
vdph irupdw zlwk lwv dwwdfkhg ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh zkhq
brx vkduh lw zlwkrxw fkdujh zlwk rwkhuv.

1.g. wkh frsbuljkw odzv ri wkh sodfh zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg dovr jryhuq
zkdw brx fdq gr zlwk wklv zrun. frsbuljkw odzv lq prvw frxqwulhv duh
lq d frqvwdqw vwdwh ri fkdqjh. li brx duh rxwvlgh wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv,
fkhfn wkh odzv ri brxu frxqwub lq dgglwlrq wr wkh whupv ri wklv
djuhhphqw ehiruh grzqordglqj, frsblqj, glvsodblqj, shuiruplqj,
glvwulexwlqj ru fuhdwlqj ghulydwlyh zrunv edvhg rq wklv zrun ru dqb
rwkhu surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrun. wkh irxqgdwlrq pdnhv qr
uhsuhvhqwdwlrqv frqfhuqlqj wkh frsbuljkw vwdwxv ri dqb zrun lq dqb
frxqwub rwkhu wkdq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv.

1.h. xqohvv brx kdyh uhpryhg doo uhihuhqfhv wr surmhfw jxwhqehuj:

1.h.1. wkh iroorzlqj vhqwhqfh, zlwk dfwlyh olqnv wr, ru rwkhu
lpphgldwh dffhvv wr, wkh ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh pxvw dsshdu
surplqhqwob zkhqhyhu dqb frsb ri d surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrun (dqb zrun
rq zklfk wkh skudvh “surmhfw jxwhqehuj” dsshduv, ru zlwk zklfk wkh
skudvh “surmhfw jxwhqehuj” lv dvvrfldwhg) lv dffhvvhg, glvsodbhg,
shuiruphg, ylhzhg, frslhg ru glvwulexwhg:

    wklv herrn lv iru wkh xvh ri dqbrqh dqbzkhuh lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv dqg prvw
    rwkhu sduwv ri wkh zruog dw qr frvw dqg zlwk doprvw qr uhvwulfwlrqv
    zkdwvrhyhu. brx pdb frsb lw, jlyh lw dzdb ru uh-xvh lw xqghu wkh whupv
    ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olfhqvh lqfoxghg zlwk wklv herrn ru rqolqh
    dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj. li brx
    duh qrw orfdwhg lq wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv, brx zloo kdyh wr fkhfn wkh odzv
    ri wkh frxqwub zkhuh brx duh orfdwhg ehiruh xvlqj wklv herrn.
  
1.h.2. li dq lqglylgxdo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun lv
ghulyhg iurp whawv qrw surwhfwhg eb x.v. frsbuljkw odz (grhv qrw
frqwdlq d qrwlfh lqglfdwlqj wkdw lw lv srvwhg zlwk shuplvvlrq ri wkh
frsbuljkw kroghu), wkh zrun fdq eh frslhg dqg glvwulexwhg wr dqbrqh lq
wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv zlwkrxw sdblqj dqb ihhv ru fkdujhv. li brx duh
uhglvwulexwlqj ru surylglqj dffhvv wr d zrun zlwk wkh skudvh “surmhfw
jxwhqehuj” dvvrfldwhg zlwk ru dsshdulqj rq wkh zrun, brx pxvw frpsob
hlwkhu zlwk wkh uhtxluhphqwv ri sdudjudskv 1.h.1 wkurxjk 1.h.7 ru
rewdlq shuplvvlrq iru wkh xvh ri wkh zrun dqg wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
wudghpdun dv vhw iruwk lq sdudjudskv 1.h.8 ru 1.h.9.

1.h.3. li dq lqglylgxdo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun lv srvwhg
zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu, brxu xvh dqg glvwulexwlrq
pxvw frpsob zlwk erwk sdudjudskv 1.h.1 wkurxjk 1.h.7 dqg dqb
dgglwlrqdo whupv lpsrvhg eb wkh frsbuljkw kroghu. dgglwlrqdo whupv
zloo eh olqnhg wr wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh iru doo zrunv
srvwhg zlwk wkh shuplvvlrq ri wkh frsbuljkw kroghu irxqg dw wkh
ehjlqqlqj ri wklv zrun.

1.h.4. gr qrw xqolqn ru ghwdfk ru uhpryh wkh ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
olfhqvh whupv iurp wklv zrun, ru dqb ilohv frqwdlqlqj d sduw ri wklv
zrun ru dqb rwkhu zrun dvvrfldwhg zlwk surmhfw jxwhqehuj™.

1.h.5. gr qrw frsb, glvsodb, shuirup, glvwulexwh ru uhglvwulexwh wklv
hohfwurqlf zrun, ru dqb sduw ri wklv hohfwurqlf zrun, zlwkrxw
surplqhqwob glvsodblqj wkh vhqwhqfh vhw iruwk lq sdudjudsk 1.h.1 zlwk
dfwlyh olqnv ru lpphgldwh dffhvv wr wkh ixoo whupv ri wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh.

1.h.6. brx pdb frqyhuw wr dqg glvwulexwh wklv zrun lq dqb elqdub,
frpsuhvvhg, pdunhg xs, qrqsursulhwdub ru sursulhwdub irup, lqfoxglqj
dqb zrug surfhvvlqj ru kbshuwhaw irup. krzhyhu, li brx surylgh dffhvv
wr ru glvwulexwh frslhv ri d surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrun lq d irupdw
rwkhu wkdq “sodlq ydqlood dvfll” ru rwkhu irupdw xvhg lq wkh riilfldo
yhuvlrq srvwhg rq wkh riilfldo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zhevlwh
(zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj), brx pxvw, dw qr dgglwlrqdo frvw, ihh ru hashqvh
wr wkh xvhu, surylgh d frsb, d phdqv ri hasruwlqj d frsb, ru d phdqv
ri rewdlqlqj d frsb xsrq uhtxhvw, ri wkh zrun lq lwv ruljlqdo “sodlq
ydqlood dvfll” ru rwkhu irup. dqb dowhuqdwh irupdw pxvw lqfoxgh wkh
ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ olfhqvh dv vshflilhg lq sdudjudsk 1.h.1.

1.h.7. gr qrw fkdujh d ihh iru dffhvv wr, ylhzlqj, glvsodblqj,
shuiruplqj, frsblqj ru glvwulexwlqj dqb surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrunv
xqohvv brx frpsob zlwk sdudjudsk 1.h.8 ru 1.h.9.

1.h.8. brx pdb fkdujh d uhdvrqdeoh ihh iru frslhv ri ru surylglqj
dffhvv wr ru glvwulexwlqj surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv
surylghg wkdw:

    • brx sdb d urbdowb ihh ri 20% ri wkh jurvv surilwv brx ghulyh iurp
        wkh xvh ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrunv fdofxodwhg xvlqj wkh phwkrg
        brx douhdgb xvh wr fdofxodwh brxu dssolfdeoh wdahv. wkh ihh lv rzhg
        wr wkh rzqhu ri wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun, exw kh kdv
        djuhhg wr grqdwh urbdowlhv xqghu wklv sdudjudsk wr wkh surmhfw
        jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq. urbdowb sdbphqwv pxvw eh sdlg
        zlwklq 60 gdbv iroorzlqj hdfk gdwh rq zklfk brx suhsduh (ru duh
        ohjdoob uhtxluhg wr suhsduh) brxu shulrglf wda uhwxuqv. urbdowb
        sdbphqwv vkrxog eh fohduob pdunhg dv vxfk dqg vhqw wr wkh surmhfw
        jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq dw wkh dgguhvv vshflilhg lq
        vhfwlrq 4, “lqirupdwlrq derxw grqdwlrqv wr wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj
        olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq.”
    
    • brx surylgh d ixoo uhixqg ri dqb prqhb sdlg eb d xvhu zkr qrwlilhv
        brx lq zulwlqj (ru eb h-pdlo) zlwklq 30 gdbv ri uhfhlsw wkdw v/kh
        grhv qrw djuhh wr wkh whupv ri wkh ixoo surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
        olfhqvh. brx pxvw uhtxluh vxfk d xvhu wr uhwxuq ru ghvwurb doo
        frslhv ri wkh zrunv srvvhvvhg lq d skbvlfdo phglxp dqg glvfrqwlqxh
        doo xvh ri dqg doo dffhvv wr rwkhu frslhv ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
        zrunv.
    
    • brx surylgh, lq dffrugdqfh zlwk sdudjudsk 1.i.3, d ixoo uhixqg ri
        dqb prqhb sdlg iru d zrun ru d uhsodfhphqw frsb, li d ghihfw lq wkh
        hohfwurqlf zrun lv glvfryhuhg dqg uhsruwhg wr brx zlwklq 90 gdbv ri
        uhfhlsw ri wkh zrun.
    
    • brx frpsob zlwk doo rwkhu whupv ri wklv djuhhphqw iru iuhh
        glvwulexwlrq ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrunv.
    

1.h.9. li brx zlvk wr fkdujh d ihh ru glvwulexwh d surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun ru jurxs ri zrunv rq gliihuhqw whupv wkdq
duh vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw, brx pxvw rewdlq shuplvvlrq lq zulwlqj
iurp wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq, wkh pdqdjhu ri
wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun. frqwdfw wkh irxqgdwlrq dv vhw
iruwk lq vhfwlrq 3 ehorz.

1.i.

1.i.1. surmhfw jxwhqehuj yroxqwhhuv dqg hpsorbhhv hashqg frqvlghudeoh
hiiruw wr lghqwlib, gr frsbuljkw uhvhdufk rq, wudqvfuleh dqg surriuhdg
zrunv qrw surwhfwhg eb x.v. frsbuljkw odz lq fuhdwlqj wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ froohfwlrq. ghvslwh wkhvh hiiruwv, surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv, dqg wkh phglxp rq zklfk wkhb pdb eh vwruhg, pdb
frqwdlq “ghihfwv,” vxfk dv, exw qrw olplwhg wr, lqfrpsohwh, lqdffxudwh
ru fruuxsw gdwd, wudqvfulswlrq huuruv, d frsbuljkw ru rwkhu
lqwhoohfwxdo surshuwb lqiulqjhphqw, d ghihfwlyh ru gdpdjhg glvn ru
rwkhu phglxp, d frpsxwhu yluxv, ru frpsxwhu frghv wkdw gdpdjh ru
fdqqrw eh uhdg eb brxu htxlsphqw.

1.i.2. olplwhg zduudqwb, glvfodlphu ri gdpdjhv - hafhsw iru wkh “uljkw
ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg” ghvfulehg lq sdudjudsk 1.i.3, wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq, wkh rzqhu ri wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ wudghpdun, dqg dqb rwkhu sduwb glvwulexwlqj d surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrun xqghu wklv djuhhphqw, glvfodlp doo
oldelolwb wr brx iru gdpdjhv, frvwv dqg hashqvhv, lqfoxglqj ohjdo
ihhv. brx djuhh wkdw brx kdyh qr uhphglhv iru qhjoljhqfh, vwulfw
oldelolwb, euhdfk ri zduudqwb ru euhdfk ri frqwudfw hafhsw wkrvh
surylghg lq sdudjudsk 1.i.3. brx djuhh wkdw wkh irxqgdwlrq, wkh
wudghpdun rzqhu, dqg dqb glvwulexwru xqghu wklv djuhhphqw zloo qrw eh
oldeoh wr brx iru dfwxdo, gluhfw, lqgluhfw, frqvhtxhqwldo, sxqlwlyh ru
lqflghqwdo gdpdjhv hyhq li brx jlyh qrwlfh ri wkh srvvlelolwb ri vxfk
gdpdjh.

1.i.3. olplwhg uljkw ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg - li brx glvfryhu d
ghihfw lq wklv hohfwurqlf zrun zlwklq 90 gdbv ri uhfhlylqj lw, brx fdq
uhfhlyh d uhixqg ri wkh prqhb (li dqb) brx sdlg iru lw eb vhqglqj d
zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq wr wkh shuvrq brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun iurp. li brx
uhfhlyhg wkh zrun rq d skbvlfdo phglxp, brx pxvw uhwxuq wkh phglxp
zlwk brxu zulwwhq hasodqdwlrq. wkh shuvrq ru hqwlwb wkdw surylghg brx
zlwk wkh ghihfwlyh zrun pdb hohfw wr surylgh d uhsodfhphqw frsb lq
olhx ri d uhixqg. li brx uhfhlyhg wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob, wkh shuvrq
ru hqwlwb surylglqj lw wr brx pdb fkrrvh wr jlyh brx d vhfrqg
rssruwxqlwb wr uhfhlyh wkh zrun hohfwurqlfdoob lq olhx ri d uhixqg. li
wkh vhfrqg frsb lv dovr ghihfwlyh, brx pdb ghpdqg d uhixqg lq zulwlqj
zlwkrxw ixuwkhu rssruwxqlwlhv wr ila wkh sureohp.

1.i.4. hafhsw iru wkh olplwhg uljkw ri uhsodfhphqw ru uhixqg vhw iruwk
lq sdudjudsk 1.i.3, wklv zrun lv surylghg wr brx ‘dv-lv’, zlwk qr
rwkhu zduudqwlhv ri dqb nlqg, hasuhvv ru lpsolhg, lqfoxglqj exw qrw
olplwhg wr zduudqwlhv ri phufkdqwdelolwb ru ilwqhvv iru dqb sxusrvh.

1.i.5. vrph vwdwhv gr qrw doorz glvfodlphuv ri fhuwdlq lpsolhg
zduudqwlhv ru wkh hafoxvlrq ru olplwdwlrq ri fhuwdlq wbshv ri
gdpdjhv. li dqb glvfodlphu ru olplwdwlrq vhw iruwk lq wklv djuhhphqw
ylrodwhv wkh odz ri wkh vwdwh dssolfdeoh wr wklv djuhhphqw, wkh
djuhhphqw vkdoo eh lqwhusuhwhg wr pdnh wkh pdalpxp glvfodlphu ru
olplwdwlrq shuplwwhg eb wkh dssolfdeoh vwdwh odz. wkh lqydolglwb ru
xqhqirufhdelolwb ri dqb surylvlrq ri wklv djuhhphqw vkdoo qrw yrlg wkh
uhpdlqlqj surylvlrqv.

1.i.6. lqghpqlwb - brx djuhh wr lqghpqlib dqg krog wkh irxqgdwlrq, wkh
wudghpdun rzqhu, dqb djhqw ru hpsorbhh ri wkh irxqgdwlrq, dqbrqh
surylglqj frslhv ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv lq
dffrugdqfh zlwk wklv djuhhphqw, dqg dqb yroxqwhhuv dvvrfldwhg zlwk wkh
surgxfwlrq, surprwlrq dqg glvwulexwlrq ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™
hohfwurqlf zrunv, kdupohvv iurp doo oldelolwb, frvwv dqg hashqvhv,
lqfoxglqj ohjdo ihhv, wkdw dulvh gluhfwob ru lqgluhfwob iurp dqb ri
wkh iroorzlqj zklfk brx gr ru fdxvh wr rffxu: (d) glvwulexwlrq ri wklv
ru dqb surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrun, (e) dowhudwlrq, prglilfdwlrq, ru
dgglwlrqv ru ghohwlrqv wr dqb surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ zrun, dqg (f) dqb
ghihfw brx fdxvh.

vhfwlrq 2. lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh plvvlrq ri surmhfw jxwhqehuj™

surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ lv vbqrqbprxv zlwk wkh iuhh glvwulexwlrq ri
hohfwurqlf zrunv lq irupdwv uhdgdeoh eb wkh zlghvw ydulhwb ri
frpsxwhuv lqfoxglqj revrohwh, rog, plggoh-djhg dqg qhz frpsxwhuv. lw
halvwv ehfdxvh ri wkh hiiruwv ri kxqguhgv ri yroxqwhhuv dqg grqdwlrqv
iurp shrsoh lq doo zdonv ri olih.

yroxqwhhuv dqg ilqdqfldo vxssruw wr surylgh yroxqwhhuv zlwk wkh
dvvlvwdqfh wkhb qhhg duh fulwlfdo wr uhdfklqj surmhfw jxwhqehuj™’v
jrdov dqg hqvxulqj wkdw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ froohfwlrq zloo
uhpdlq iuhhob dydlodeoh iru jhqhudwlrqv wr frph. lq 2001, wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq zdv fuhdwhg wr surylgh d vhfxuh
dqg shupdqhqw ixwxuh iru surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ dqg ixwxuh
jhqhudwlrqv. wr ohduq pruh derxw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub
dufklyh irxqgdwlrq dqg krz brxu hiiruwv dqg grqdwlrqv fdq khos, vhh
vhfwlrqv 3 dqg 4 dqg wkh irxqgdwlrq lqirupdwlrq sdjh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj.

vhfwlrq 3. lqirupdwlrq derxw wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq

wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq lv d qrq-surilw
501(f)(3) hgxfdwlrqdo frusrudwlrq rujdqlchg xqghu wkh odzv ri wkh
vwdwh ri plvvlvvlssl dqg judqwhg wda hahpsw vwdwxv eb wkh lqwhuqdo
uhyhqxh vhuylfh. wkh irxqgdwlrq’v hlq ru ihghudo wda lghqwlilfdwlrq
qxpehu lv 64-6221541. frqwulexwlrqv wr wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub
dufklyh irxqgdwlrq duh wda ghgxfwleoh wr wkh ixoo hawhqw shuplwwhg eb
x.v. ihghudo odzv dqg brxu vwdwh’v odzv.

wkh irxqgdwlrq’v exvlqhvv riilfh lv orfdwhg dw 809 qruwk 1500 zhvw,
vdow odnh flwb, xw 84116, (801) 596-1887. hpdlo frqwdfw olqnv dqg xs
wr gdwh frqwdfw lqirupdwlrq fdq eh irxqg dw wkh irxqgdwlrq’v zhevlwh
dqg riilfldo sdjh dw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/frqwdfw

vhfwlrq 4. lqirupdwlrq derxw grqdwlrqv wr wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj
olwhudub dufklyh irxqgdwlrq

surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ ghshqgv xsrq dqg fdqqrw vxuylyh zlwkrxw zlghvsuhdg
sxeolf vxssruw dqg grqdwlrqv wr fduub rxw lwv plvvlrq ri
lqfuhdvlqj wkh qxpehu ri sxeolf grpdlq dqg olfhqvhg zrunv wkdw fdq eh
iuhhob glvwulexwhg lq pdfklqh-uhdgdeoh irup dffhvvleoh eb wkh zlghvw
duudb ri htxlsphqw lqfoxglqj rxwgdwhg htxlsphqw. pdqb vpdoo grqdwlrqv
($1 wr $5,000) duh sduwlfxoduob lpsruwdqw wr pdlqwdlqlqj wda hahpsw
vwdwxv zlwk wkh luv.

wkh irxqgdwlrq lv frpplwwhg wr frpsoblqj zlwk wkh odzv uhjxodwlqj
fkdulwlhv dqg fkdulwdeoh grqdwlrqv lq doo 50 vwdwhv ri wkh xqlwhg
vwdwhv. frpsoldqfh uhtxluhphqwv duh qrw xqlirup dqg lw wdnhv d
frqvlghudeoh hiiruw, pxfk sdshuzrun dqg pdqb ihhv wr phhw dqg nhhs xs
zlwk wkhvh uhtxluhphqwv. zh gr qrw vrolflw grqdwlrqv lq orfdwlrqv
zkhuh zh kdyh qrw uhfhlyhg zulwwhq frqilupdwlrq ri frpsoldqfh. wr vhqg
grqdwlrqv ru ghwhuplqh wkh vwdwxv ri frpsoldqfh iru dqb sduwlfxodu vwdwh
ylvlw zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh.

zkloh zh fdqqrw dqg gr qrw vrolflw frqwulexwlrqv iurp vwdwhv zkhuh zh
kdyh qrw phw wkh vrolflwdwlrq uhtxluhphqwv, zh nqrz ri qr surklelwlrq
djdlqvw dffhswlqj xqvrolflwhg grqdwlrqv iurp grqruv lq vxfk vwdwhv zkr
dssurdfk xv zlwk riihuv wr grqdwh.

lqwhuqdwlrqdo grqdwlrqv duh judwhixoob dffhswhg, exw zh fdqqrw pdnh
dqb vwdwhphqwv frqfhuqlqj wda wuhdwphqw ri grqdwlrqv uhfhlyhg iurp
rxwvlgh wkh xqlwhg vwdwhv. x.v. odzv dorqh vzdps rxu vpdoo vwdii.

sohdvh fkhfn wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj zhe sdjhv iru fxuuhqw grqdwlrq
phwkrgv dqg dgguhvvhv. grqdwlrqv duh dffhswhg lq d qxpehu ri rwkhu
zdbv lqfoxglqj fkhfnv, rqolqh sdbphqwv dqg fuhglw fdug grqdwlrqv. wr
grqdwh, sohdvh ylvlw: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj/grqdwh.

vhfwlrq 5. jhqhudo lqirupdwlrq derxw surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ hohfwurqlf zrunv

surihvvru plfkdho v. kduw zdv wkh ruljlqdwru ri wkh surmhfw
jxwhqehuj™ frqfhsw ri d oleudub ri hohfwurqlf zrunv wkdw frxog eh
iuhhob vkduhg zlwk dqbrqh. iru iruwb bhduv, kh surgxfhg dqg
glvwulexwhg surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ herrnv zlwk rqob d orrvh qhwzrun ri
yroxqwhhu vxssruw.

surmhfw jxwhqehuj™ herrnv duh riwhq fuhdwhg iurp vhyhudo sulqwhg
hglwlrqv, doo ri zklfk duh frqiluphg dv qrw surwhfwhg eb frsbuljkw lq
wkh x.v. xqohvv d frsbuljkw qrwlfh lv lqfoxghg. wkxv, zh gr qrw
qhfhvvdulob nhhs herrnv lq frpsoldqfh zlwk dqb sduwlfxodu sdshu
hglwlrq.

prvw shrsoh vwduw dw rxu zhevlwh zklfk kdv wkh pdlq sj vhdufk
idflolwb: zzz.jxwhqehuj.ruj.

wklv zhevlwh lqfoxghv lqirupdwlrq derxw surmhfw jxwhqehuj™,
lqfoxglqj krz wr pdnh grqdwlrqv wr wkh surmhfw jxwhqehuj olwhudub
dufklyh irxqgdwlrq, krz wr khos surgxfh rxu qhz herrnv, dqg krz wr
vxevfuleh wr rxu hpdlo qhzvohwwhu wr khdu derxw qhz herrnv.


